Chapter XXVIII.
The Place Royale.


They proceeded silently to the centre of the Place, but as at this very
moment the moon had just emerged from behind a cloud, they thought they
might be observed if they remained on that spot and therefore regained
the shade of the lime-trees.

There were benches here and there; the four gentlemen stopped near
them; at a sign from Athos, Porthos and D’Artagnan sat down, the two
others stood in front of them.

After a few minutes of silent embarrassment, Athos spoke.

“Gentlemen,” he said, “our presence here is the best proof of former
friendship; not one of us has failed the others at this rendezvous; not
one has, therefore, to reproach himself.”

“Hear me, count,” replied D’Artagnan; “instead of making compliments to
each other, let us explain our conduct to each other, like men of right
and honest hearts.”

“I wish for nothing more; have you any cause of complaint against me or
Monsieur d’Herblay? If so, speak out,” answered Athos.

“I have,” replied D’Artagnan. “When I saw you at your chateau at
Bragelonne, I made certain proposals to you which you perfectly
understood; instead of answering me as a friend, you played with me as
a child; the friendship, therefore, that you boast of was not broken
yesterday by the shock of swords, but by your dissimulation at your
castle.”

“D’Artagnan!” said Athos, reproachfully.

“You asked for candor and you have it. You ask what I have against you;
I tell you. And I have the same sincerity to show you, if you wish,
Monsieur d’Herblay; I acted in a similar way to you and you also
deceived me.”

“Really, monsieur, you say strange things,” said Aramis. “You came
seeking me to make to me certain proposals, but did you make them? No,
you sounded me, nothing more. Very well what did I say to you? that
Mazarin was contemptible and that I wouldn’t serve Mazarin. But that is
all. Did I tell you that I wouldn’t serve any other? On the contrary, I
gave you to understand, I think, that I adhered to the princes. We even
joked very pleasantly, if I remember rightly, on the very probable
contingency of your being charged by the cardinal with my arrest. Were
you a party man? There is no doubt of that. Well, why should not we,
too, belong to a party? You had your secret and we had ours; we didn’t
exchange them. So much the better; it proves that we know how to keep
our secrets.”

“I do not reproach you, monsieur,” said D’Artagnan; “’tis only because
Monsieur de la Fere has spoken of friendship that I question your
conduct.”

“And what do you find in it that is worthy of blame?” asked Aramis,
haughtily.

The blood mounted instantly to the temples of D’Artagnan, who arose,
and replied:

“I consider it worthy conduct of a pupil of Jesuits.”

On seeing D’Artagnan rise, Porthos rose also; these four men were
therefore all standing at the same time, with a menacing aspect,
opposite to each other.

Upon hearing D’Artagnan’s reply, Aramis seemed about to draw his sword,
when Athos prevented him.

“D’Artagnan,” he said, “you are here to-night, still infuriated by
yesterday’s adventure. I believed your heart noble enough to enable a
friendship of twenty years to overcome an affront of a quarter of an
hour. Come, do you really think you have anything to say against me?
Say it then; if I am in fault I will avow the error.”

The grave and harmonious tones of that beloved voice seemed to have
still its ancient influence, whilst that of Aramis, which had become
harsh and tuneless in his moments of ill-humor, irritated him. He
answered therefore:

“I think, monsieur le comte, that you had something to communicate to
me at your chateau of Bragelonne, and that gentleman”—he pointed to
Aramis—“had also something to tell me when I was in his convent. At
that time I was not concerned in the adventure, in the course of which
you have so successfully estopped me! However, because I was prudent
you must not take me for a fool. If I had wished to widen the breach
between those whom Monsieur d’Herblay chooses to receive with a rope
ladder and those whom he receives with a wooden ladder, I could have
spoken out.”

“What are you meddling with?” cried Aramis, pale with anger, suspecting
that D’Artagnan had acted as a spy on him and had seen him with Madame
de Longueville.

“I never meddle save with what concerns me, and I know how to make
believe that I haven’t seen what does not concern me; but I hate
hypocrites, and among that number I place musketeers who are abbés and
abbés who are musketeers; and,” he added, turning to Porthos “here’s a
gentleman who’s of the same opinion as myself.”

Porthos, who had not spoken one word, answered merely by a word and a
gesture.

He said “yes” and he put his hand on his sword.

Aramis started back and drew his. D’Artagnan bent forward, ready either
to attack or to stand on his defense.

Athos at that moment extended his hand with the air of supreme command
which characterized him alone, drew out his sword and the scabbard at
the same time, broke the blade in the sheath on his knee and threw the
pieces to his right. Then turning to Aramis:

“Aramis,” he said, “break your sword.”

Aramis hesitated.

“It must be done,” said Athos; then in a lower and more gentle voice,
he added. “I wish it.”

Then Aramis, paler than before, but subdued by these words, snapped the
serpent blade between his hands, and then folding his arms, stood
trembling with rage.

These proceedings made D’Artagnan and Porthos draw back. D’Artagnan did
not draw his sword; Porthos put his back into the sheath.

“Never!” exclaimed Athos, raising his right hand to Heaven, “never! I
swear before God, who seeth us, and who, in the darkness of this night
heareth us, never shall my sword cross yours, never my eye express a
glance of anger, nor my heart a throb of hatred, at you. We lived
together, we loved, we hated together; we shed, we mingled our blood
together, and too probably, I may still add, that there may be yet a
bond between us closer even than that of friendship; perhaps there may
be the bond of crime; for we four, we once did condemn, judge and slay
a human being whom we had not any right to cut off from this world,
although apparently fitter for hell than for this life. D’Artagnan, I
have always loved you as my son; Porthos, we slept six years side by
side; Aramis is your brother as well as mine, and Aramis has once loved
you, as I love you now and as I have ever loved you. What can Cardinal
Mazarin be to us, to four men who compelled such a man as Richelieu to
act as we pleased? What is such or such a prince to us, who fixed the
diadem upon a great queen’s head? D’Artagnan, I ask your pardon for
having yesterday crossed swords with you; Aramis does the same to
Porthos; now hate me if you can; but for my own part, I shall ever,
even if you do hate me, retain esteem and friendship for you. I repeat
my words, Aramis, and then, if you desire it, and if they desire it,
let us separate forever from our old friends.”

There was a solemn, though momentary silence, which was broken by
Aramis.

“I swear,” he said, with a calm brow and kindly glance, but in a voice
still trembling with recent emotion, “I swear that I no longer bear
animosity to those who were once my friends. I regret that I ever
crossed swords with you, Porthos; I swear not only that it shall never
again be pointed at your breast, but that in the bottom of my heart
there will never in future be the slightest hostile sentiment; now,
Athos, come.”

Athos was about to retire.

“Oh! no! no! do not go away!” exclaimed D’Artagnan, impelled by one of
those irresistible impulses which showed the nobility of his nature,
the native brightness of his character; “I swear that I would give the
last drop of my blood and the last fragment of my limbs to preserve the
friendship of such a friend as you, Athos—of such a man as you,
Aramis.” And he threw himself into the arms of Athos.

“My son!” exclaimed Athos, pressing him in his arms.

“And as for me,” said Porthos, “I swear nothing, but I’m choked.
Forsooth! If I were obliged to fight against you, I think I should
allow myself to be pierced through and through, for I never loved any
one but you in the wide world;” and honest Porthos burst into tears as
he embraced Athos.

“My friends,” said Athos, “this is what I expected from such hearts as
yours. Yes, I have said it and I now repeat it: our destinies are
irrevocably united, although we now pursue divergent roads. I respect
your convictions, and whilst we fight for opposite sides, let us remain
friends. Ministers, princes, kings, will pass away like mountain
torrents; civil war, like a forest flame; but we—we shall remain; I
have a presentiment that we shall.”

“Yes,” replied D’Artagnan, “let us still be musketeers, and let us
retain as our battle-standard that famous napkin of the bastion St.
Gervais, on which the great cardinal had three fleurs-de-lis
embroidered.”

“Be it so,” cried Aramis. “Cardinalists or Frondeurs, what matters it?
Let us meet again as capital seconds in a duel, devoted friends in
business, merry companions in our ancient pleasures.”

“And whenever,” added Athos, “we meet in battle, at this word, ‘Place
Royale!’ let us put our swords into our left hands and shake hands with
the right, even in the very lust and music of the hottest carnage.”

“You speak charmingly,” said Porthos.

“And are the first of men!” added D’Artagnan. “You excel us all.”

Athos smiled with ineffable pleasure.

“’Tis then all settled. Gentlemen, your hands; are we not pretty good
Christians?”

“Egad!” said D’Artagnan, “by Heaven! yes.”

“We should be so on this occasion, if only to be faithful to our oath,”
said Aramis.

“Ah, I’m ready to do what you will,” cried Porthos; “even to swear by
Mahomet. Devil take me if I’ve ever been so happy as at this moment.”

And he wiped his eyes, still moist.

“Has not one of you a cross?” asked Athos.

Aramis smiled and drew from his vest a cross of diamonds, which was
hung around his neck by a chain of pearls. “Here is one,” he said.

“Well,” resumed Athos, “swear on this cross, which, in spite of its
magnificent material, is still a cross; swear to be united in spite of
everything, and forever, and may this oath bind us to each other, and
even, also, our descendants! Does this oath satisfy you?”

“Yes,” said they all, with one accord.

“Ah, traitor!” muttered D’Artagnan, leaning toward Aramis and
whispering in his ear, “you have made us swear on the crucifix of a
Frondeuse.”




Chapter XXIX.
The Ferry across the Oise.


We hope that the reader has not quite forgotten the young traveler whom
we left on the road to Flanders.

In losing sight of his guardian, whom he had quitted, gazing after him
in front of the royal basilican, Raoul spurred on his horse, in order
not only to escape from his own melancholy reflections, but also to
hide from Olivain the emotion his face might betray.

One hour’s rapid progress, however, sufficed to disperse the gloomy
fancies that had clouded the young man’s bright anticipations; and the
hitherto unfelt pleasure of freedom—a pleasure which is sweet even to
those who have never known dependence—seemed to Raoul to gild not only
Heaven and earth, but especially that blue but dim horizon of life we
call the future.

Nevertheless, after several attempts at conversation with Olivain he
foresaw that many days passed thus would prove exceedingly dull; and
the count’s agreeable voice, his gentle and persuasive eloquence,
recurred to his mind at the various towns through which they journeyed
and about which he had no longer any one to give him those interesting
details which he would have drawn from Athos, the most amusing and the
best informed of guides. Another recollection contributed also to
sadden Raoul: on their arrival at Sonores he had perceived, hidden
behind a screen of poplars, a little chateau which so vividly recalled
that of La Valliere to his mind that he halted for nearly ten minutes
to gaze at it, and resumed his journey with a sigh too abstracted even
to reply to Olivain’s respectful inquiry about the cause of so much
fixed attention. The aspect of external objects is often a mysterious
guide communicating with the fibres of memory, which in spite of us
will arouse them at times; this thread, like that of Ariadne, when once
unraveled will conduct one through a labyrinth of thought, in which one
loses one’s self in endeavoring to follow that phantom of the past
which is called recollection.

Now the sight of this chateau had taken Raoul back fifty leagues
westward and had caused him to review his life from the moment when he
had taken leave of little Louise to that in which he had seen her for
the first time; and every branch of oak, every gilded weathercock on
roof of slates, reminded him that, instead of returning to the friends
of his childhood, every instant estranged him further and that perhaps
he had even left them forever.

With a full heart and burning head he desired Olivain to lead on the
horses to a wayside inn, which he observed within gunshot range, a
little in advance of the place they had reached.

As for himself, he dismounted and remained under a beautiful group of
chestnuts in flower, amidst which were murmuring a multitude of happy
bees, and bade Olivain send the host to him with writing paper and ink,
to be placed on a table which he found there, conveniently ready.
Olivain obeyed and continued on his way, whilst Raoul remained sitting,
with his elbow leaning on the table, from time to time gently shaking
the flowers from his head, which fell upon him like snow, and gazing
vaguely on the charming landscape spread out before him, dotted over
with green fields and groups of trees. Raoul had been there about ten
minutes, during five of which he was lost in reverie, when there
appeared within the circle comprised in his rolling gaze a man with a
rubicund face, who, with a napkin around his body, another under his
arm, and a white cap upon his head, approached him, holding paper, pen
and ink in hand.

“Ha! ha!” laughed the apparition, “every gentleman seems to have the
same fancy, for not a quarter of an hour ago a young lad, well mounted
like you, as tall as you and of about your age, halted before this
clump of trees and had this table and this chair brought here, and
dined here, with an old gentleman who seemed to be his tutor, upon a
pie, of which they haven’t left a mouthful, and two bottles of Macon
wine, of which they haven’t left a drop, but fortunately we have still
some of the same wine and some of the same pies left, and if your
worship will but give your orders——”

“No, friend,” replied Raoul, smiling, “I am obliged to you, but at this
moment I want nothing but the things for which I have asked—only I
shall be very glad if the ink prove black and the pen good; upon these
conditions I will pay for the pen the price of the bottle, and for the
ink the price of the pie.”

“Very well, sir,” said the host, “I’ll give the pie and the bottle of
wine to your servant, and in this way you will have the pen and ink
into the bargain.”

“Do as you like,” said Raoul, who was beginning his apprenticeship with
that particular class of society, who, when there were robbers on the
highroads, were connected with them, and who, since highwaymen no
longer exist, have advantageously and aptly filled their vacant place.

The host, his mind at ease about his bill, placed pen, ink and paper
upon the table. By a lucky chance the pen was tolerably good and Raoul
began to write. The host remained standing in front of him, looking
with a kind of involuntary admiration at his handsome face, combining
both gravity and sweetness of expression. Beauty has always been and
always will be all-powerful.

“He’s not a guest like the other one here just now,” observed mine host
to Olivain, who had rejoined his master to see if he wanted anything,
“and your young master has no appetite.”

“My master had appetite enough three days ago, but what can one do? he
lost it the day before yesterday.”

And Olivain and the host took their way together toward the inn,
Olivain, according to the custom of serving-men well pleased with their
place, relating to the tavern-keeper all that he could say in favor of
the young gentleman; whilst Raoul wrote on thus:

“Sir,—After a four hours’ march I stop to write to you, for I miss you
every moment, and I am always on the point of turning my head as if to
reply when you speak to me. I was so bewildered by your departure and
so overcome with grief at our separation, that I am sure I was able to
but very feebly express all the affection and gratitude I feel toward
you. You will forgive me, sir, for your heart is of such a generous
nature that you can well understand all that has passed in mine. I
entreat you to write to me, for you form a part of my existence, and,
if I may venture to tell you so, I also feel anxious. It seemed to me
as if you were yourself preparing for some dangerous undertaking, about
which I did not dare to question you, since you told me nothing. I
have, therefore, as you see, great need of hearing from you. Now that
you are no longer beside me I am afraid every moment of erring. You
sustained me powerfully, sir, and I protest to you that to-day I feel
very lonely. Will you have the goodness, sir, should you receive news
from Blois, to send me a few lines about my little friend Mademoiselle
de la Valliere, about whose health, when we left, so much anxiety was
felt? You can understand, honored and dear guardian, how precious and
indispensable to me is the remembrance of the years that I have passed
with you. I hope that you will sometimes, too, think of me, and if at
certain hours you should miss me, if you should feel any slight regret
at my absence, I shall be overwhelmed with joy at the thought that you
appreciate my affection for and my devotion to yourself, and that I
have been able to prove them to you whilst I had the happiness of
living with you.”

After finishing this letter Raoul felt more composed; he looked well
around him to see if Olivain and the host might not be watching him,
whilst he impressed a kiss upon the paper, a mute and touching caress,
which the heart of Athos might well divine on opening the letter.

During this time Olivain had finished his bottle and eaten his pie; the
horses were also refreshed. Raoul motioned to the host to approach,
threw a crown upon the table, mounted his horse, and posted his letter
at Senlis. The rest that had been thus afforded to men and horses
enabled them to continue their journey at a good round pace. At
Verberie, Raoul desired Olivain to make some inquiry about the young
man who was preceding them; he had been observed to pass only
three-quarters of an hour previously, but he was well mounted, as the
tavern-keeper had already said, and rode at a rapid pace.

“Let us try and overtake this gentleman,” said Raoul to Olivain; “like
ourselves he is on his way to join the army and may prove agreeable
company.”

It was about four o’clock in the afternoon when Raoul arrived at
Compiegne; there he dined heartily and again inquired about the young
gentleman who was in advance of them. He had stopped, like Raoul, at
the Hotel of the Bell and Bottle, the best at Compiegne; and had
started again on his journey, saying that he should sleep at Noyon.

“Well, let us sleep at Noyon,” said Raoul.

“Sir,” replied Olivain, respectfully, “allow me to remark that we have
already much fatigued the horses this morning. I think it would be well
to sleep here and to start again very early to-morrow. Eighteen leagues
is enough for the first stage.”

“The Comte de la Fere wished me to hasten on,” replied Raoul, “that I
might rejoin the prince on the morning of the fourth day; let us push
on, then, to Noyon; it will be a stage similar to those we traveled
from Blois to Paris. We shall arrive at eight o’clock. The horses will
have a long night’s rest, and at five o’clock to-morrow morning we can
be again on the road.”

Olivain dared offer no opposition to this determination but he followed
his master, grumbling.

“Go on, go on,” said he, between his teeth, “expend your ardor the
first day; to-morrow, instead of journeying twenty leagues, you will
travel ten, the day after to-morrow, five, and in three days you will
be in bed. There you must rest; young people are such braggarts.”

It was easy to see that Olivain had not been taught in the school of
the Planchets and the Grimauds. Raoul really felt tired, but he was
desirous of testing his strength, and, brought up in the principles of
Athos and certain of having heard him speak a thousand times of stages
of twenty-five leagues, he did not wish to fall far short of his model.
D’Artagnan, that man of iron, who seemed to be made of nerve and muscle
only, had struck him with admiration. Therefore, in spite of Olivain’s
remarks, he continued to urge his steed more and more, and following a
pleasant little path, leading to a ferry, and which he had been assured
shortened the journey by the distance of one league, he arrived at the
summit of a hill and perceived the river flowing before him. A little
troop of men on horseback were waiting on the edge of the stream, ready
to embark. Raoul did not doubt this was the gentleman and his escort;
he called out to him, but they were too distant to be heard; then, in
spite of the weariness of his beast, he made it gallop but the rising
ground soon deprived him of all sight of the travelers, and when he had
again attained a new height, the ferryboat had left the shore and was
making for the opposite bank. Raoul, seeing that he could not arrive in
time to cross the ferry with the travelers, halted to wait for Olivain.
At this moment a shriek was heard that seemed to come from the river.
Raoul turned toward the side whence the cry had sounded, and shaded his
eyes from the glare of the setting sun with his hand.

“Olivain!” he exclaimed, “what do I see below there?”

A second scream, more piercing than the first, now sounded.

“Oh, sir!” cried Olivain, “the rope which holds the ferryboat has
broken and the boat is drifting. But what do I see in the
water—something struggling?”

“Oh, yes,” exclaimed Raoul, fixing his glance on one point in the
stream, splendidly illumined by the setting sun, “a horse, a rider!”

“They are sinking!” cried Olivain in his turn.

It was true, and Raoul was convinced that some accident had happened
and that a man was drowning; he gave his horse its head, struck his
spurs into its sides, and the animal, urged by pain and feeling that he
had space open before him, bounded over a kind of paling which inclosed
the landing place, and fell into the river, scattering to a distance
waves of white froth.

“Ah, sir!” cried Olivain, “what are you doing? Good God!”

Raoul was directing his horse toward the unhappy man in danger. This
was, in fact, a custom familiar to him. Having been brought up on the
banks of the Loire, he might have been said to have been cradled on its
waves; a hundred times he had crossed it on horseback, a thousand times
had swum across. Athos, foreseeing the period when he should make a
soldier of the viscount, had inured him to all kinds of arduous
undertakings.

“Oh, heavens!” continued Olivain, in despair, “what would the count say
if he only saw you now!”

“The count would do as I do,” replied Raoul, urging his horse
vigorously forward.

“But I—but I,” cried Olivain, pale and disconsolate rushing about on
the shore, “how shall I cross?”

“Leap, coward!” cried Raoul, swimming on; then addressing the traveler,
who was struggling twenty yards in front of him: “Courage, sir!” said
he, “courage! we are coming to your aid.”

Olivain advanced, retired, then made his horse rear—turned it and then,
struck to the core by shame, leaped, as Raoul had done, only repeating:

“I am a dead man! we are lost!”

In the meantime, the ferryboat had floated away, carried down by the
stream, and the shrieks of those whom it contained resounded more and
more. A man with gray hair had thrown himself from the boat into the
river and was swimming vigorously toward the person who was drowning;
but being obliged to go against the current he advanced but slowly.
Raoul continued his way and was visibly gaining ground; but the horse
and its rider, of whom he did not lose sight, were evidently sinking.
The nostrils of the horse were no longer above water, and the rider,
who had lost the reins in struggling, fell with his head back and his
arms extended. One moment longer and all would disappear.

“Courage!” cried Raoul, “courage!”

“Too late!” murmured the young man, “too late!”

The water closed above his head and stifled his voice.

Raoul sprang from his horse, to which he left the charge of its own
preservation, and in three or four strokes was at the gentleman’s side;
he seized the horse at once by the curb and raised its head above
water; the animal began to breathe again and, as if he comprehended
that they had come to his aid, redoubled his efforts. Raoul at the same
time seized one of the young man’s hands and placed it on the mane,
which it grasped with the tenacity of a drowning man. Thus, sure that
the rider would not release his hold, Raoul now only directed his
attention to the horse, which he guided to the opposite bank, helping
it to cut through the water and encouraging it with words.

All at once the horse stumbled against a ridge and then placed its foot
on the sand.

“Saved!” exclaimed the man with gray hair, who also touched bottom.

“Saved!” mechanically repeated the young gentleman, releasing the mane
and sliding from the saddle into Raoul’s arms; Raoul was but ten yards
from the shore; there he bore the fainting man, and laying him down
upon the grass, unfastened the buttons of his collar and unhooked his
doublet. A moment later the gray-headed man was beside him. Olivain
managed in his turn to land, after crossing himself repeatedly; and the
people in the ferryboat guided themselves as well as they were able
toward the bank, with the aid of a pole which chanced to be in the
boat.

Thanks to the attentions of Raoul and the man who accompanied the young
gentleman, the color gradually returned to the pale cheeks of the dying
man, who opened his eyes, at first entirely bewildered, but who soon
fixed his gaze upon the person who had saved him.

“Ah, sir,” he exclaimed, “it was you! Without you I was a dead
man—thrice dead.”

“But one recovers, sir, as you perceive,” replied Raoul, “and we have
but had a little bath.”

“Oh! sir, what gratitude I feel!” exclaimed the man with gray hair.

“Ah, there you are, my good D’Arminges; I have given you a great
fright, have I not? but it is your own fault. You were my tutor, why
did you not teach me to swim?”

“Oh, monsieur le comte,” replied the old man, “had any misfortune
happened to you, I should never have dared to show myself to the
marshal again.”

“But how did the accident happen?” asked Raoul.

“Oh, sir, in the most natural way possible,” replied he to whom they
had given the title of count. “We were about a third of the way across
the river when the cord of the ferryboat broke. Alarmed by the cries
and gestures of the boatmen, my horse sprang into the water. I cannot
swim, and dared not throw myself into the river. Instead of aiding the
movements of my horse, I paralyzed them; and I was just going to drown
myself with the best grace in the world, when you arrived just in time
to pull me out of the water; therefore, sir, if you will agree,
henceforward we are friends until death.”

“Sir,” replied Raoul, bowing, “I am entirely at your service, I assure
you.”

“I am called the Count de Guiche,” continued the young man; “my father
is the Marechal de Grammont; and now that you know who I am, do me the
honor to inform me who you are.”

“I am the Viscount de Bragelonne,” answered Raoul, blushing at being
unable to name his father, as the Count de Guiche had done.

“Viscount, your countenance, your goodness and your courage incline me
toward you; my gratitude is already due. Shake hands—I crave your
friendship.”

“Sir,” said Raoul, returning the count’s pressure of the hand, “I like
you already, from my heart; pray regard me as a devoted friend, I
beseech you.”

“And now, where are you going, viscount?” inquired De Guiche.

“To join the army, under the prince, count.”

“And I, too!” exclaimed the young man, in a transport of joy. “Oh, so
much the better, we will fire the first shot together.”

“It is well; be friends,” said the tutor; “young as you both are, you
were perhaps born under the same star and were destined to meet. And
now,” continued he, “you must change your clothes; your servants, to
whom I gave directions the moment they had left the ferryboat, ought to
be already at the inn. Linen and wine are both being warmed; come.”

The young men had no objection to this proposition; on the contrary,
they thought it very timely.

They mounted again at once, whilst looks of admiration passed between
them. They were indeed two elegant horsemen, with figures slight and
upright, noble faces, bright and proud looks, loyal and intelligent
smiles.

De Guiche might have been about eighteen years of age, but he was
scarcely taller than Raoul, who was only fifteen.




Chapter XXX.
Skirmishing.


The halt at Noyon was but brief, every one there being wrapped in
profound sleep. Raoul had desired to be awakened should Grimaud arrive,
but Grimaud did not arrive. Doubtless, too, the horses on their part
appreciated the eight hours of repose and the abundant stabling which
was granted them. The Count de Guiche was awakened at five o’clock in
the morning by Raoul, who came to wish him good-day. They breakfasted
in haste, and at six o’clock had already gone ten miles.

The young count’s conversation was most interesting to Raoul, therefore
he listened much, whilst the count talked well and long. Brought up in
Paris, where Raoul had been but once; at the court, which Raoul had
never seen; his follies as page; two duels, which he had already found
the means of fighting, in spite of the edicts against them and, more
especially, in spite of his tutor’s vigilance—these things excited the
greatest curiosity in Raoul. Raoul had only been at M. Scarron’s house;
he named to Guiche the people whom he had seen there. Guiche knew
everybody—Madame de Neuillan, Mademoiselle d’Aubigne, Mademoiselle de
Scudery, Mademoiselle Paulet, Madame de Chevreuse. He criticised
everybody humorously. Raoul trembled, lest he should laugh among the
rest at Madame de Chevreuse, for whom he entertained deep and genuine
sympathy, but either instinctively, or from affection for the duchess,
he said everything in her favor. His praises increased Raoul’s
friendship twofold. Then came the question of gallantry and love
affairs. Under this head, also, Bragelonne had much more to hear than
to tell. He listened attentively and fancied that he discovered through
three or four rather frivolous adventures, that the count, like
himself, had a secret to hide in the depths of his heart.

De Guiche, as we have said before, had been educated at the court, and
the intrigues of this court were not unknown to him. It was the same
court of which Raoul had so often heard the Comte de la Fere speak,
except that its aspect had much changed since the period when Athos had
himself been part of it; therefore everything which the Count de Guiche
related was new to his traveling companion. The young count, witty and
caustic, passed all the world in review; the queen herself was not
spared, and Cardinal Mazarin came in for his share of ridicule.

The day passed away as rapidly as an hour. The count’s tutor, a man of
the world and a bon vivant, up to his eyes in learning, as his pupil
described him, often recalled the profound erudition, the witty and
caustic satire of Athos to Raoul; but as regarded grace, delicacy, and
nobility of external appearance, no one in these points was to be
compared to the Comte de la Fere.

The horses, which were more kindly used than on the previous day,
stopped at Arras at four o’clock in the evening. They were approaching
the scene of war; and as bands of Spaniards sometimes took advantage of
the night to make expeditions even as far as the neighborhood of Arras,
they determined to remain in the town until the morrow. The French army
held all between Pont-a-Marc as far as Valenciennes, falling back upon
Douai. The prince was said to be in person at Bethune.

The enemy’s army extended from Cassel to Courtray; and as there was no
species of violence or pillage it did not commit, the poor people on
the frontier quitted their isolated dwellings and fled for refuge into
the strong cities which held out a shelter to them. Arras was
encumbered with fugitives. An approaching battle was much spoken of,
the prince having manoeuvred, until that movement, only in order to
await a reinforcement that had just reached him.

The young men congratulated themselves on having arrived so
opportunely. The evening was employed in discussing the war; the grooms
polished their arms; the young men loaded the pistols in case of a
skirmish, and they awoke in despair, having both dreamed that they had
arrived too late to participate in the battle. In the morning it was
rumored that Prince de Condé had evacuated Bethune and fallen back on
Carvin, leaving, however, a strong garrison in the former city.

But as there was nothing positively certain in this report, the young
warriors decided to continue their way toward Bethune, free on the road
to diverge to the right and march to Carvin if necessary.

The count’s tutor was well acquainted with the country; he consequently
proposed to take a crossroad, which lay between that of Lens and that
of Bethune. They obtained information at Ablain, and a statement of
their route was left for Grimaud. About seven o’clock in the morning
they set out. De Guiche, who was young and impulsive, said to Raoul,
“Here we are, three masters and three servants. Our valets are well
armed and yours seems to be tough enough.”

“I have never seen him put to the test,” replied Raoul, “but he is a
Breton, which promises something.”

“Yes, yes,” resumed De Guiche; “I am sure he can fire a musket when
required. On my side I have two sure men, who have been in action with
my father. We therefore represent six fighting men; if we should meet a
little troop of enemies, equal or even superior in number to our own,
shall we charge them, Raoul?”

“Certainly, sir,” replied the viscount.

“Holloa! young people—stop there!” said the tutor, joining in the
conversation. “Zounds! how you manoeuvre my instructions, count! You
seem to forget the orders I received to conduct you safe and sound to
his highness the prince! Once with the army you may be killed at your
good pleasure; but until that time, I warn you that in my capacity of
general of the army I shall order a retreat and turn my back on the
first red coat we come across.” De Guiche and Raoul glanced at each
other, smiling.

They arrived at Ablain without accident. There they inquired and
learned that the prince had in reality quitted Bethune and stationed
himself between Cambria and La Venthie. Therefore, leaving directions
at every place for Grimaud, they took a crossroad which conducted the
little troop by the bank of a small stream flowing into the Lys. The
country was beautiful, intersected by valleys as green as the emerald.
Here and there they passed little copses crossing the path which they
were following. In anticipation of some ambuscade in each of these
little woods the tutor placed his two servants at the head of the band,
thus forming the advance guard. Himself and the two young men
represented the body of the army, whilst Olivain, with his rifle upon
his knee and his eyes upon the watch, protected the rear.

They had observed for some time before them, on the horizon, a rather
thick wood; and when they had arrived at a distance of a hundred steps
from it, Monsieur d’Arminges took his usual precautions and sent on in
advance the count’s two grooms. The servants had just disappeared under
the trees, followed by the tutor, and the young men were laughing and
talking about a hundred yards off. Olivain was at the same distance in
the rear, when suddenly there resounded five or six musket-shots. The
tutor cried halt; the young men obeyed, pulling up their steeds, and at
the same moment the two valets were seen returning at a gallop.

The young men, impatient to learn the cause of the firing, spurred on
toward the servants. The tutor followed them.

“Were you stopped?” eagerly inquired the two youths.

“No,” replied the servants, “it is even probable that we have not been
seen; the shots were fired about a hundred paces in advance of us, in
the thickest part of the wood, and we returned to ask your advice.”

“My advice is this,” said Monsieur d’Arminges, “and if needs be, my
will, that we beat a retreat. There may be an ambuscade concealed in
this wood.”

“Did you see nothing there?” asked the count.

“I thought I saw,” said one of the servants, “horsemen dressed in
yellow, creeping along the bed of the stream.

“That’s it,” said the tutor. “We have fallen in with a party of
Spaniards. Come back, sirs, back.”

The two youths looked at each other, and at this moment a pistol-shot
and cries for help were heard. Another glance between the young men
convinced them both that neither had any wish to go back, and as the
tutor had already turned his horse’s head, they both spurred forward,
Raoul crying: “Follow me, Olivain!” and the Count de Guiche: “Follow,
Urban and Planchet!” And before the tutor could recover from his
surprise they had both disappeared into the forest. Whilst they spurred
their steeds they held their pistols ready also. In five minutes they
arrived at the spot whence the noise had proceeded, and then
restraining their horses, they advanced cautiously.

“Hush,” whispered De Guiche, “these are cavaliers.”

“Yes, three on horseback and three who have dismounted.”

“Can you see what they are doing?”

“Yes, they appear to be searching a wounded or dead man.”

“It is some cowardly assassination,” said De Guiche.

“They are soldiers, though,” resumed De Bragelonne.

“Yes, skirmishers; that is to say, highway robbers.”

“At them!” cried Raoul. “At them!” echoed De Guiche.

“Oh! gentlemen! gentlemen! in the name of Heaven!” cried the poor
tutor.

But he was not listened to, and his cries only served to arouse the
attention of the Spaniards.

The men on horseback at once rushed at the two youths, leaving the
three others to complete the plunder of the dead or wounded travelers;
for on approaching nearer, instead of one extended figure, the young
men discovered two. De Guiche fired the first shot at ten paces and
missed his man; and the Spaniard, who had advanced to meet Raoul, aimed
in his turn, and Raoul felt a pain in the left arm, similar to that of
a blow from a whip. He let off his fire at but four paces. Struck in
the breast and extending his arms, the Spaniard fell back on the
crupper, and the terrified horse, turning around, carried him off.

Raoul at this moment perceived the muzzle of a gun pointed at him, and
remembering the recommendation of Athos, he, with the rapidity of
lightning, made his horse rear as the shot was fired. His horse bounded
to one side, losing its footing, and fell, entangling Raoul’s leg under
its body. The Spaniard sprang forward and seized the gun by its muzzle,
in order to strike Raoul on the head with the butt. In the position in
which Raoul lay, unfortunately, he could neither draw his sword from
the scabbard, nor his pistols from their holsters. The butt end of the
musket hovered over his head, and he could scarcely restrain himself
from closing his eyes, when with one bound Guiche reached the Spaniard
and placed a pistol at his throat. “Yield!” he cried, “or you are a
dead man!” The musket fell from the soldier’s hands, who yielded on the
instant. Guiche summoned one of his grooms, and delivering the prisoner
into his charge, with orders to shoot him through the head if he
attempted to escape, he leaped from his horse and approached Raoul.

“Faith, sir,” said Raoul, smiling, although his pallor betrayed the
excitement consequent on a first affair, “you are in a great hurry to
pay your debts and have not been long under any obligation to me.
Without your aid,” continued he, repeating the count’s words “I should
have been a dead man—thrice dead.”

“My antagonist took flight,” replied De Guiche “and left me at liberty
to come to your assistance. But are you seriously wounded? I see you
are covered with blood!”

“I believe,” said Raoul, “that I have got something like a scratch on
the arm. If you will help me to drag myself from under my horse I hope
nothing need prevent us continuing our journey.”

Monsieur d’Arminges and Olivain had already dismounted and were
attempting to raise the struggling horse. At last Raoul succeeded in
drawing his foot from the stirrup and his leg from under the animal,
and in a second he was on his feet again.

“Nothing broken?” asked De Guiche.

“Faith, no, thank Heaven!” replied Raoul; “but what has become of the
poor wretches whom these scoundrels were murdering?”

“I fear we arrived too late. They have killed them, I think, and taken
flight, carrying off their booty. My servants are examining the
bodies.”

“Let us go and see whether they are quite dead, or if they can still be
helped,” suggested Raoul. “Olivain, we have come into possession of two
horses, but I have lost my own. Take for yourself the better of the two
and give me yours.”

They approached the spot where the unfortunate victims lay.




Chapter XXXI.
The Monk.


Two men lay prone upon the ground, one bathed in blood and motionless,
with his face toward the earth; this one was dead. The other leaned
against a tree, supported there by the two valets, and was praying
fervently, with clasped hands and eyes raised to Heaven. He had
received a ball in his thigh, which had broken the bone. The young men
first approached the dead man.

“He is a priest,” said Bragelonne, “he has worn the tonsure. Oh, the
scoundrels! to lift their hands against a minister of God.”

“Come here, sir,” said Urban, an old soldier who had served under the
cardinal duke in all his campaigns; “come here, there is nothing to be
done with him, whilst we may perhaps be able to save the other.”

The wounded man smiled sadly. “Save me! Oh, no!” said he, “but help me
to die, if you can.”

“Are you a priest?” asked Raoul.

“No sir.”

“I ask, as your unfortunate companion appeared to me to belong to the
church.”

“He is the curate of Bethune, sir, and was carrying the holy vessels
belonging to his church, and the treasure of the chapter, to a safe
place, the prince having abandoned our town yesterday; and as it was
known that bands of the enemy were prowling about the country, no one
dared to accompany the good man, so I offered to do so.

“And, sir,” continued the wounded man, “I suffer much and would like,
if possible, to be carried to some house.”

“Where you can be relieved?” asked De Guiche.

“No, where I can confess.”

“But perhaps you are not so dangerously wounded as you think,” said
Raoul.

“Sir,” replied the wounded man, “believe me, there is no time to lose;
the ball has broken the thigh bone and entered the intestines.”

“Are you a surgeon?” asked De Guiche.

“No, but I know a little about wounds, and mine, I know, is mortal.
Try, therefore, either to carry me to some place where I may see a
priest or take the trouble to send one to me here. It is my soul that
must be saved; as for my body, it is lost.”

“To die whilst doing a good deed! It is impossible. God will help you.”

“Gentlemen, in the name of Heaven!” said the wounded man, collecting
all his forces, as if to get up, “let us not lose time in useless
words. Either help me to gain the nearest village or swear to me on
your salvation that you will send me the first monk, the first curé,
the first priest you may meet. But,” he added in a despairing tone,
“perhaps no one will dare to come for it is known that the Spaniards
are ranging through the country, and I shall die without absolution. My
God! my God! Good God! good God!” added the wounded man, in an accent
of terror which made the young men shudder; “you will not allow that?
that would be too terrible!”

“Calm yourself, sir,” replied De Guiche. “I swear to you, you shall
receive the consolation that you ask. Only tell us where we shall find
a house at which we can demand aid and a village from which we can
fetch a priest.”

“Thank you, and God reward you! About half a mile from this, on the
same road, there is an inn, and about a mile further on, after leaving
the inn, you will reach the village of Greney. There you must find the
curate, or if he is not at home, go to the convent of the Augustines,
which is the last house on the right, and bring me one of the brothers.
Monk or priest, it matters not, provided only that he has received from
holy church the power of absolving in articulo mortis.”

“Monsieur d’Arminges,” said De Guiche, “remain beside this unfortunate
man and see that he is removed as gently as possible. The vicomte and
myself will go and find a priest.”

“Go, sir,” replied the tutor; “but in Heaven’s name do not expose
yourself to danger!”

“Do not fear. Besides, we are safe for to-day; you know the axiom, ‘Non
bis in idem.’”

“Courage, sir,” said Raoul to the wounded man. “We are going to execute
your wishes.”

“May Heaven prosper you!” replied the dying man, with an accent of
gratitude impossible to describe.

The two young men galloped off in the direction mentioned and in ten
minutes reached the inn. Raoul, without dismounting, called to the host
and announced that a wounded man was about to be brought to his house
and begged him in the meantime to prepare everything needful. He
desired him also, should he know in the neighborhood any doctor or
chirurgeon, to fetch him, taking on himself the payment of the
messenger.

The host, who saw two young noblemen, richly clad, promised everything
they required, and our two cavaliers, after seeing that preparations
for the reception were actually begun, started off again and proceeded
rapidly toward Greney.

They had gone rather more than a league and had begun to descry the
first houses of the village, the red-tiled roofs of which stood out
from the green trees which surrounded them, when, coming toward them
mounted on a mule, they perceived a poor monk, whose large hat and gray
worsted dress made them take him for an Augustine brother. Chance for
once seemed to favor them in sending what they were so assiduously
seeking. He was a man about twenty-two or twenty-three years old, but
who appeared much older from ascetic exercises. His complexion was
pale, not of that deadly pallor which is a kind of neutral beauty, but
of a bilious, yellow hue; his colorless hair was short and scarcely
extended beyond the circle formed by the hat around his head, and his
light blue eyes seemed destitute of any expression.

“Sir,” began Raoul, with his usual politeness, “are you an
ecclesiastic?”

“Why do you ask me that?” replied the stranger, with a coolness which
was barely civil.

“Because we want to know,” said De Guiche, haughtily.

The stranger touched his mule with his heel and continued his way.

In a second De Guiche had sprung before him and barred his passage.
“Answer, sir,” exclaimed he; “you have been asked politely, and every
question is worth an answer.”

“I suppose I am free to say or not to say who I am to two strangers who
take a fancy to ask me.”

It was with difficulty that De Guiche restrained the intense desire he
had of breaking the monk’s bones.

“In the first place,” he said, making an effort to control himself, “we
are not people who may be treated anyhow; my friend there is the
Viscount of Bragelonne and I am the Count de Guiche. Nor was it from
caprice we asked the question, for there is a wounded and dying man who
demands the succor of the church. If you be a priest, I conjure you in
the name of humanity to follow me to aid this man; if you be not, it is
a different matter, and I warn you in the name of courtesy, of which
you appear profoundly ignorant, that I shall chastise you for your
insolence.”

The pale face of the monk became so livid and his smile so strange,
that Raoul, whose eyes were still fixed upon him, felt as if this smile
had struck to his heart like an insult.

“He is some Spanish or Flemish spy,” said he, putting his hand to his
pistol. A glance, threatening and transient as lightning, replied to
Raoul.

“Well, sir,” said De Guiche, “are you going to reply?”

“I am a priest,” said the young man.

“Then, father,” said Raoul, forcing himself to convey a respect by
speech that did not come from his heart, “if you are a priest you have
an opportunity, as my friend has told you, of exercising your vocation.
At the next inn you will find a wounded man, now being attended by our
servants, who has asked the assistance of a minister of God.”

“I will go,” said the monk.

And he touched his mule.

“If you do not go, sir,” said De Guiche, “remember that we have two
steeds able to catch your mule and the power of having you seized
wherever you may be; and then I swear your trial will be summary; one
can always find a tree and a cord.”

The monk’s eye again flashed, but that was all; he merely repeated his
phrase, “I will go,”—and he went.

“Let us follow him,” said De Guiche; “it will be the surest plan.”

“I was about to propose so doing,” answered De Bragelonne.

In the space of five minutes the monk turned around to ascertain
whether he was followed or not.

“You see,” said Raoul, “we have done wisely.”

“What a horrible face that monk has,” said De Guiche.

“Horrible!” replied Raoul, “especially in expression.”

“Yes, yes,” said De Guiche, “a strange face; but these monks are
subject to such degrading practices; their fasts make them pale, the
blows of the discipline make them hypocrites, and their eyes become
inflamed through weeping for the good things of this life we common
folk enjoy, but they have lost.”

“Well,” said Raoul, “the poor man will get his priest, but, by Heaven,
the penitent appears to me to have a better conscience than the
confessor. I confess I am accustomed to priests of a very different
appearance.”

“Ah!” exclaimed De Guiche, “you must understand that this is one of
those wandering brothers, who go begging on the high road until some
day a benefice falls down from Heaven on them; they are mostly
foreigners—Scotch, Irish or Danish. I have seen them before.”

“As ugly?”

“No, but reasonably hideous.”

“What a misfortune for the wounded man to die under the hands of such a
friar!”

“Pshaw!” said De Guiche. “Absolution comes not from him who administers
it, but from God. However, for my part, I would rather die unshriven
than have anything to say to such a confessor. You are of my opinion,
are you not, viscount? and I see you playing with the pommel of your
sword, as if you had a great inclination to break the holy father’s
head.”

“Yes, count, it is a strange thing and one which might astonish you,
but I feel an indescribable horror at the sight of yonder man. Have you
ever seen a snake rise up on your path?”

“Never,” answered De Guiche.

“Well, it has happened to me to do so in our Blaisois forests, and I
remember that the first time I encountered one with its eyes fixed upon
me, curled up, swinging its head and pointing its tongue, I remained
fixed, pale and as though fascinated, until the moment when the Comte
de la Fere——”

“Your father?” asked De Guiche.

“No, my guardian,” replied Raoul, blushing.

“Very well——”

“Until the moment when the Comte de la Fere,” resumed Raoul, “said,
‘Come, Bragelonne, draw your sword;’ then only I rushed upon the
reptile and cut it in two, just at the moment when it was rising on its
tail and hissing, ere it sprang upon me. Well, I vow I felt exactly the
same sensation at sight of that man when he said, ‘Why do you ask me
that?’ and looked so strangely at me.”

“Then you regret that you did not cut your serpent in two morsels?”

“Faith, yes, almost,” said Raoul.

They had now arrived within sight of the little inn and could see on
the opposite side the procession bearing the wounded man and guided by
Monsieur d’Arminges. The youths spurred on.

“There is the wounded man,” said De Guiche, passing close to the
Augustine brother. “Be good enough to hurry yourself a little, monsieur
monk.”

As for Raoul, he avoided the monk by the whole width of the road and
passed him, turning his head away in repulsion.

The young men rode up to the wounded man to announce that they were
followed by the priest. He raised himself to glance in the direction
which they pointed out, saw the monk, and fell back upon the litter,
his face illumined by joy.

“And now,” said the youths, “we have done all we can for you; and as we
are in haste to rejoin the prince’s army we must continue our journey.
You will excuse us, sir, but we are told that a battle is expected and
we do not wish to arrive the day after it.”

“Go, my young sirs,” said the sick man, “and may you both be blessed
for your piety. You have done for me, as you promised, all that you
could do. As for me I can only repeat, may God protect you and all dear
to you!”

“Sir,” said De Guiche to his tutor, “we will precede you, and you can
rejoin us on the road to Cambrin.”

The host was at his door and everything was prepared—bed, bandages, and
lint; and a groom had gone to Lens, the nearest village, for a doctor.

“Everything,” said he to Raoul, “shall be done as you desire; but you
will not stop to have your wound dressed?”

“Oh, my wound—mine—’tis nothing,” replied the viscount; “it will be
time to think about it when we next halt; only have the goodness,
should you see a cavalier who makes inquiries about a young man on a
chestnut horse followed by a servant, to tell him, in fact, that you
have seen me, but that I have continued my journey and intend to dine
at Mazingarbe and to stop at Cambrin. This cavalier is my attendant.”

“Would it not be safer and more certain if I should ask him his name
and tell him yours?” demanded the host.

“There is no harm in over-precaution. I am the Viscount de Bragelonne
and he is called Grimaud.”

At this moment the wounded man arrived from one direction and the monk
from the other, the latter dismounting from his mule and desiring that
it should be taken to the stables without being unharnessed.

“Sir monk,” said De Guiche, “confess well that brave man; and be not
concerned for your expenses or for those of your mule; all is paid.”

“Thanks, monsieur,” said the monk, with one of those smiles that made
Bragelonne shudder.

“Come, count,” said Raoul, who seemed instinctively to dislike the
vicinity of the Augustine; “come, I feel ill here,” and the two young
men spurred on.

The litter, borne by two servants, now entered the house. The host and
his wife were standing on the steps, whilst the unhappy man seemed to
suffer dreadful pain and yet to be concerned only to know if he was
followed by the monk. At sight of this pale, bleeding man, the wife
grasped her husband’s arm.

“Well, what’s the matter?” asked the latter, “are you going to be ill
just now?”

“No, but look,” replied the hostess, pointing to the wounded man; “I
ask you if you recognize him?”

“That man—wait a bit.”

“Ah! I see you know him,” exclaimed the wife; “for you have become pale
in your turn.”

“Truly,” cried the host, “misfortune is coming on our house; it is the
former executioner of Bethune.”

“The former executioner of Bethune!” murmured the young monk, shrinking
back and showing on his countenance the feeling of repugnance which his
penitent inspired.

Monsieur d’Arminges, who was at the door, perceived his hesitation.

“Sir monk,” said he, “whether he is now or has been an executioner,
this unfortunate being is none the less a man. Render to him, then, the
last service he can by any possibility ask of you, and your work will
be all the more meritorious.”

The monk made no reply, but silently wended his way to the room where
the two valets had deposited the dying man on a bed. D’Arminges and
Olivain and the two grooms then mounted their horses, and all four
started off at a quick trot to rejoin Raoul and his companion. Just as
the tutor and his escort disappeared in their turn, a new traveler
stopped on the threshold of the inn.

“What does your worship want?” demanded the host, pale and trembling
from the discovery he had just made.

The traveler made a sign as if he wished to drink, and then pointed to
his horse and gesticulated like a man who is brushing something.

“Ah, diable!” said the host to himself; “this man seems dumb. And where
will your worship drink?”

“There,” answered the traveler, pointing to the table.

“I was mistaken,” said the host, “he’s not quite dumb. And what else
does your worship wish for?”

“To know if you have seen a young man pass, fifteen years of age,
mounted on a chestnut horse and followed by a groom?”

“The Viscount de Bragelonne?

“Just so.”

“Then you are called Monsieur Grimaud?”

The traveler made a sign of assent.

“Well, then,” said the host, “your young master was here a quarter of
an hour ago; he will dine at Mazingarbe and sleep at Cambrin.”

“How far is Mazingarbe?”

“Two miles and a half.”

“Thank you.”

Grimaud was drinking his wine silently and had just placed his glass on
the table to be filled a second time, when a terrific scream resounded
from the room occupied by the monk and the dying man. Grimaud sprang
up.

“What is that?” said he; “whence comes that cry?”

“From the wounded man’s room,” replied the host.

“What wounded man?”

“The former executioner of Bethune, who has just been brought in here,
assassinated by Spaniards, and who is now being confessed by an
Augustine friar.”

“The old executioner of Bethune,” muttered Grimaud; “a man between
fifty-five and sixty, tall, strong, swarthy, black hair and beard?”

“That is he, except that his beard has turned gray and his hair is
white; do you know him?” asked the host.

“I have seen him once,” replied Grimaud, a cloud darkening his
countenance at the picture so suddenly summoned to the bar of
recollection.

At this instant a second cry, less piercing than the first, but
followed by prolonged groaning, was heard.

The three listeners looked at one another in alarm.

“We must see what it is,” said Grimaud.

“It sounds like the cry of one who is being murdered,” murmured the
host.

“Mon Dieu!” said the woman, crossing herself.

If Grimaud was slow in speaking, we know that he was quick to act; he
sprang to the door and shook it violently, but it was bolted on the
other side.

“Open the door!” cried the host; “open it instantly, sir monk!”

No reply.

“Unfasten it, or I will break it in!” said Grimaud.

The same silence, and then, ere the host could oppose his design,
Grimaud seized a pair of pincers he perceived in a corner and forced
the bolt. The room was inundated with blood, dripping from the
mattresses upon which lay the wounded man, speechless; the monk had
disappeared.

“The monk!” cried the host; “where is the monk?”

Grimaud sprang toward an open window which looked into the courtyard.

“He has escaped by this means,” exclaimed he.

“Do you think so?” said the host, bewildered; “boy, see if the mule
belonging to the monk is still in the stable.”

“There is no mule,” cried he to whom this question was addressed.

The host clasped his hands and looked around him suspiciously, whilst
Grimaud knit his brows and approached the wounded man, whose worn, hard
features awoke in his mind such awful recollections of the past.

“There can be no longer any doubt but that it is himself,” said he.

“Does he still live?” inquired the innkeeper.

Making no reply, Grimaud opened the poor man’s jacket to feel if the
heart beat, whilst the host approached in his turn; but in a moment
they both fell back, the host uttering a cry of horror and Grimaud
becoming pallid. The blade of a dagger was buried up to the hilt in the
left side of the executioner.

“Run! run for help!” cried Grimaud, “and I will remain beside him
here.”

The host quitted the room in agitation, and as for his wife, she had
fled at the sound of her husband’s cries.




Chapter XXXII.
The Absolution.


This is what had taken place: We have seen that it was not of his own
free will, but, on the contrary, very reluctantly, that the monk
attended the wounded man who had been recommended to him in so strange
a manner. Perhaps he would have sought to escape by flight had he seen
any possibility of doing so. He was restrained by the threats of the
two gentlemen and by the presence of their attendants, who doubtless
had received their instructions. And besides, he considered it most
expedient, without exhibiting too much ill-will, to follow to the end
his role as confessor.

The monk entered the chamber and approached the bed of the wounded man.
The executioner searched his face with the quick glance peculiar to
those who are about to die and have no time to lose. He made a movement
of surprise and said:

“Father, you are very young.”

“Men who bear my robe have no age,” replied the monk, dryly.

“Alas, speak to me more gently, father; in my last moments I need a
friend.”

“Do you suffer much?” asked the monk.

“Yes, but in my soul much more than in my body.”

“We will save your soul,” said the young man; “but are you really the
executioner of Bethune, as these people say?”

“That is to say,” eagerly replied the wounded man, who doubtless feared
that the name of executioner would take from him the last help that he
could claim—“that is to say, I was, but am no longer; it is fifteen
years since I gave up the office. I still assist at executions, but no
longer strike the blow myself—no, indeed.”

“You have, then, a repugnance to your profession?”

“So long as I struck in the name of the law and of justice my
profession allowed me to sleep quietly, sheltered as I was by justice
and law; but since that terrible night when I became an instrument of
private vengeance and when with personal hatred I raised the sword over
one of God’s creatures—since that day——”

The executioner paused and shook his head with an expression of
despair.

“Tell me about it,” said the monk, who, sitting on the foot of the bed,
began to be interested in a story so strangely introduced.

“Ah!” cried the dying man, with all the effusiveness of a grief
declared after long suppression, “ah! I have sought to stifle remorse
by twenty years of good deeds; I have assuaged the natural ferocity of
those who shed blood; on every occasion I have exposed my life to save
those who were in danger, and I have preserved lives in exchange for
that I took away. That is not all; the money gained in the exercise of
my profession I have distributed to the poor; I have been assiduous in
attending church and those who formerly fled from me have become
accustomed to seeing me. All have forgiven me, some have even loved me;
but I think that God has not pardoned me, for the memory of that
execution pursues me constantly and every night I see that woman’s
ghost rising before me.”

“A woman! You have assassinated a woman, then?” cried the monk.

“You also!” exclaimed the executioner, “you use that word which sounds
ever in my ears—‘assassinated!’ I have assassinated, then, and not
executed! I am an assassin, then, and not an officer of justice!” and
he closed his eyes with a groan.

The monk doubtless feared that he would die without saying more, for he
exclaimed eagerly:

“Go on, I know nothing, as yet; when you have finished your story, God
and I will judge.”

“Oh, father,” continued the executioner, without opening his eyes, as
if he feared on opening them to see some frightful object, “it is
especially when night comes on and when I have to cross a river, that
this terror which I have been unable to conquer comes upon me; it then
seems as if my hand grew heavy, as if the cutlass was still in its
grasp, as if the water had the color of blood, and all the voices of
nature—the whispering of the trees, the murmur of the wind, the lapping
of the wave—united in a voice tearful, despairing, terrible, crying to
me, ‘Place for the justice of God!’”

“Delirium!” murmured the monk, shaking his head.

The executioner opened his eyes, turned toward the young man and
grasped his arm.

“‘Delirium,’” he repeated; “‘delirium,’ do you say? Oh, no! I remember
too well. It was evening; I had thrown the body into the river and
those words which my remorse repeats to me are those which I in my
pride pronounced. After being the instrument of human justice I aspired
to be that of the justice of God.”

“But let me see, how was it done? Speak,” said the monk.

“It was at night. A man came to me and showed me an order and I
followed him. Four other noblemen awaited me. They led me away masked.
I reserved the right of refusing if the office they required of me
should seem unjust. We traveled five or six leagues, serious, silent,
and almost without speaking. At length, through the window of a little
hut, they showed me a woman sitting, leaning on a table, and said,
‘there is the person to be executed.’”

“Horrible!” said the monk. “And you obeyed?”

“Father, that woman was a monster. It was said that she had poisoned
her second husband; she had tried to assassinate her brother-in-law;
she had just poisoned a young woman who was her rival, and before
leaving England she had, it was believed, caused the favorite of the
king to be murdered.”

“Buckingham?” cried the monk.

“Yes, Buckingham.”

“The woman was English, then?”

“No, she was French, but she had married in England.”

The monk turned pale, wiped his brow and went and bolted the door. The
executioner thought that he had abandoned him and fell back, groaning,
upon his bed.

“No, no; I am here,” said the monk, quickly coming back to him. “Go on;
who were those men?”

“One of them was a foreigner, English, I think. The four others were
French and wore the uniform of musketeers.”

“Their names?” asked the monk.

“I don’t know them, but the four other noblemen called the Englishman
‘my lord.’”

“Was the woman handsome?”

“Young and beautiful. Oh, yes, especially beautiful. I see her now, as
on her knees at my feet, with her head thrown back, she begged for
life. I have never understood how I could have laid low a head so
beautiful, with a face so pale.”

The monk seemed agitated by a strange emotion; he trembled all over; he
seemed eager to put a question which yet he dared not ask. At length,
with a violent effort at self-control:

“The name of that woman?” he said.

“I don’t know what it was. As I have said, she was twice married, once
in France, the second time in England.”

“She was young, you say?”

“Twenty-five years old.”

“Beautiful?”

“Ravishingly.”

“Blond?”

“Yes.”

“Abundance of hair—falling over her shoulders?”

“Yes.”

“Eyes of an admirable expression?”

“When she chose. Oh, yes, it is she!”

“A voice of strange sweetness?”

“How do you know it?”

The executioner raised himself on his elbow and gazed with a frightened
air at the monk, who became livid.

“And you killed her?” the monk exclaimed. “You were the tool of those
cowards who dared not kill her themselves? You had no pity for that
youthfulness, that beauty, that weakness? you killed that woman?”

“Alas! I have already told you, father, that woman, under that angelic
appearance, had an infernal soul, and when I saw her, when I recalled
all the evil she had done to me——”

“To you? What could she have done to you? Come, tell me!”

“She had seduced and ruined my brother, a priest. She had fled with him
from her convent.”

“With your brother?”

“Yes, my brother was her first lover, and she caused his death. Oh,
father, do not look in that way at me! Oh, I am guilty, then; you will
not pardon me?”

The monk recovered his usual expression.

“Yes, yes,” he said, “I will pardon you if you tell me all.”

“Oh!” cried the executioner, “all! all! all!”

“Answer, then. If she seduced your brother—you said she seduced him,
did you not?”

“Yes.”

“If she caused his death—you said that she caused his death?”

“Yes,” repeated the executioner.

“Then you must know what her name was as a young girl.”

“Oh, mon Dieu!” cried the executioner, “I think I am dying. Absolution,
father! absolution.”

“Tell me her name and I will give it.”

“Her name was——My God, have pity on me!” murmured the executioner; and
he fell back on the bed, pale, trembling, and apparently about to die.

“Her name!” repeated the monk, bending over him as if to tear from him
the name if he would not utter it; “her name! Speak, or no absolution!”

The dying man collected all his forces.

The monk’s eyes glittered.

“Anne de Bueil,” murmured the wounded man.

“Anne de Bueil!” cried the monk, standing up and lifting his hands to
Heaven. “Anne de Bueil! You said Anne de Bueil, did you not?”

“Yes, yes, that was her name; and now absolve me, for I am dying.”

“I, absolve you!” cried the priest, with a laugh which made the dying
man’s hair stand on end; “I, absolve you? I am not a priest.”

“You are not a priest!” cried the executioner. “What, then, are you?”

“I am about to tell you, wretched man.”

“Oh, mon Dieu!”

“I am John Francis de Winter.”

“I do not know you,” said the executioner.

“Wait, wait; you are going to know me. I am John Francis de Winter,” he
repeated, “and that woman——”

“Well, that woman?”

“Was my mother!”

The executioner uttered the first cry, that terrible cry which had been
first heard.

“Oh, pardon me, pardon me!” he murmured; “if not in the name of God, at
least in your own name; if not as priest, then as son.”

“Pardon you!” cried the pretended monk, “pardon you! Perhaps God will
pardon you, but I, never!”

“For pity’s sake,” said the executioner, extending his arms.

“No pity for him who had no pity! Die, impenitent, die in despair, die
and be damned!” And drawing a poniard from beneath his robe he thrust
it into the breast of the wounded man, saying, “Here is my absolution!”

Then was heard that second cry, not so loud as the first and followed
by a long groan.

The executioner, who had lifted himself up, fell back upon his bed. As
to the monk, without withdrawing the poniard from the wound, he ran to
the window, opened it, leaped out into the flowers of a small garden,
glided onward to the stable, took out his mule, went out by a back
gate, ran to a neighbouring thicket, threw off his monkish garb, took
from his valise the complete habiliment of a cavalier, clothed himself
in it, went on foot to the first post, secured there a horse and
continued with a loose rein his journey to Paris.




Chapter XXXIII.
Grimaud Speaks.


Grimaud was left alone with the executioner, who in a few moments
opened his eyes.

“Help, help,” he murmured; “oh, God! have I not a single friend in the
world who will aid me either to live or to die?”

“Take courage,” said Grimaud; “they are gone to find assistance.”

“Who are you?” asked the wounded man, fixing his half opened eyes on
Grimaud.

“An old acquaintance,” replied Grimaud.

“You?” and the wounded man sought to recall the features of the person
now before him.

“Under what circumstances did we meet?” he asked again.

“One night, twenty years ago, my master fetched you from Bethune and
conducted you to Armentieres.”

“I know you well now,” said the executioner; “you were one of the four
grooms.”

“Just so.”

“Where do you come from now?”

“I was passing by and drew up at this inn to rest my horse. They told
me the executioner of Bethune was here and wounded, when you uttered
two piercing cries. At the first we ran to the door and at the second
forced it open.”

“And the monk?” exclaimed the executioner, “did you see the monk?”

“What monk?”

“The monk that was shut in with me.”

“No, he was no longer here; he appears to have fled by the window. Was
he the man that stabbed you?”

“Yes,” said the executioner.

Grimaud moved as if to leave the room.

“What are you going to do?” asked the wounded man.

“He must be apprehended.”

“Do not attempt it; he has revenged himself and has done well. Now I
may hope that God will forgive me, since my crime is expiated.”

“Explain yourself.” said Grimaud.

“The woman whom you and your masters commanded me to kill——”

“Milady?”

“Yes, Milady; it is true you called her thus.”

“What has the monk to do with this Milady?”

“She was his mother.”

Grimaud trembled and stared at the dying man in a dull and leaden
manner.

“His mother!” he repeated.

“Yes, his mother.”

“But does he know this secret, then?”

“I mistook him for a monk and revealed it to him in confession.”

“Unhappy man!” cried Grimaud, whose face was covered with sweat at the
bare idea of the evil results such a revelation might cause; “unhappy
man, you named no one, I hope?”

“I pronounced no name, for I knew none, except his mother’s, as a young
girl, and it was by this name that he recognized her, but he knows that
his uncle was among her judges.”

Thus speaking, he fell back exhausted. Grimaud, wishing to relieve him,
advanced his hand toward the hilt of the dagger.

“Touch me not!” said the executioner; “if this dagger is withdrawn I
shall die.”

Grimaud remained with his hand extended; then, striking his forehead,
he exclaimed:

“Oh! if this man should ever discover the names of the others, my
master is lost.”

“Haste! haste to him and warn him,” cried the wounded man, “if he still
lives; warn his friends, too. My death, believe me, will not be the end
of this atrocious misadventure.”

“Where was the monk going?” asked Grimaud.

“Toward Paris.”

“Who stopped him?”

“Two young gentlemen, who were on their way to join the army and the
name of one of whom I heard his companion mention—the Viscount de
Bragelonne.”

“And it was this young man who brought the monk to you? Then it was the
will of God that it should be so and this it is which makes it all so
awful,” continued Grimaud. “And yet that woman deserved her fate; do
you not think so?”

“On one’s death-bed the crimes of others appear very small in
comparison with one’s own,” said the executioner; and falling back
exhausted he closed his eyes.

Grimaud was reluctant to leave the man alone and yet he perceived the
necessity of starting at once to bear these tidings to the Comte de la
Fere. Whilst he thus hesitated the host re-entered the room, followed
not only by a surgeon, but by many other persons, whom curiosity had
attracted to the spot. The surgeon approached the dying man, who seemed
to have fainted.

“We must first extract the steel from the side,” said he, shaking his
head in a significant manner.

The prophecy which the wounded man had just uttered recurred to
Grimaud, who turned away his head. The weapon, as we have already
stated, was plunged into the body to the hilt, and as the surgeon,
taking it by the end, drew it forth, the wounded man opened his eyes
and fixed them on him in a manner truly frightful. When at last the
blade had been entirely withdrawn, a red froth issued from the mouth of
the wounded man and a stream of blood spouted afresh from the wound
when he at length drew breath; then, fixing his eyes upon Grimaud with
a singular expression, the dying man uttered the last death-rattle and
expired.

Then Grimaud, lifting the dagger from the pool of blood which was
gliding along the room, to the horror of all present, made a sign to
the host to follow him, paid him with a generosity worthy of his master
and again mounted his horse. Grimaud’s first intention had been to
return to Paris, but he remembered the anxiety which his prolonged
absence might occasion Raoul, and reflecting that there were now only
two miles between the vicomte and himself and a quarter of an hour’s
riding would unite them, and that the going, returning and explanation
would not occupy an hour, he put spurs to his horse and a few minutes
after had reached the only inn of Mazingarbe.

Raoul was seated at table with the Count de Guiche and his tutor, when
all at once the door opened and Grimaud presented himself,
travel-stained, dirty, and sprinkled with the blood of the unhappy
executioner.

“Grimaud, my good Grimaud!” exclaimed Raoul “here you are at last!
Excuse me, sirs, this is not a servant, but a friend. How did you leave
the count?” continued he. “Does he regret me a little? Have you seen
him since I left him? Answer, for I have many things to tell you, too;
indeed, the last three days some odd adventures have happened—but what
is the matter? how pale you are! and blood, too! What is this?”

“It is the blood of the unfortunate man whom you left at the inn and
who died in my arms.”

“In your arms?—that man! but know you who he was?”

“He used to be the headsman of Bethune.”

“You knew him? and he is dead?”

“Yes.”

“Well, sir,” said D’Arminges, “it is the common lot; even an
executioner is not exempted. I had a bad opinion of him the moment I
saw his wound, and since he asked for a monk you know that it was his
opinion, too, that death would follow.”

At the mention of the monk, Grimaud became pale.

“Come, come,” continued D’Arminges, “to dinner;” for like most men of
his age and generation he did not allow sentiment or sensibility to
interfere with a repast.

“You are right, sir,” said Raoul. “Come, Grimaud, order dinner for
yourself and when you have rested a little we can talk.”

“No, sir, no,” said Grimaud. “I cannot stop a moment; I must start for
Paris again immediately.”

“What? You start for Paris? You are mistaken; it is Olivain who leaves
me; you are to remain.”

“On the contrary, Olivain is to stay and I am to go. I have come for
nothing else but to tell you so.”

“But what is the meaning of this change?”

“I cannot tell you.”

“Explain yourself.”

“I cannot explain myself.”

“Come, tell me, what is the joke?”

“Monsieur le vicomte knows that I never joke.”

“Yes, but I know also that Monsieur le Comte de la Fere arranged that
you were to remain with me and that Olivain should return to Paris. I
shall follow the count’s directions.”

“Not under present circumstances, monsieur.”

“Perhaps you mean to disobey me?”

“Yes, monsieur, I must.”

“You persist, then?”

“Yes, I am going; may you be happy, monsieur,” and Grimaud saluted and
turned toward the door to go out.

Raoul, angry and at the same time uneasy, ran after him and seized him
by the arm. “Grimaud!” he cried; “remain; I wish it.”

“Then,” replied Grimaud, “you wish me to allow monsieur le comte to be
killed.” He saluted and made a movement to depart.

“Grimaud, my friend,” said the viscount, “will you leave me thus, in
such anxiety? Speak, speak, in Heaven’s name!” And Raoul fell back
trembling upon his chair.

“I can tell you but one thing, sir, for the secret you wish to know is
not my own. You met a monk, did you not?”

“Yes.”

The young men looked at each other with an expression of fear.

“You conducted him to the wounded man and you had time to observe him,
and perhaps you would know him again were you to meet him.”

“Yes, yes!” cried both young men.

“Very well; if ever you meet him again, wherever it may be, whether on
the high road or in the street or in a church, anywhere that he or you
may be, put your foot on his neck and crush him without pity, without
mercy, as you would crush a viper or a scorpion! destroy him utterly
and quit him not until he is dead; the lives of five men are not safe,
in my opinion, as long as he is on the earth.”

And without adding another word, Grimaud, profiting by the astonishment
and terror into which he had thrown his auditors, rushed from the room.
Two minutes later the thunder of a horse’s hoofs was heard upon the
road; it was Grimaud, on his way to Paris. When once in the saddle
Grimaud reflected on two things; first, that at the pace he was going
his horse would not carry him ten miles, and secondly, that he had no
money. But Grimaud’s ingenuity was more prolific than his speech, and
therefore at the first halt he sold his steed and with the money
obtained from the purchase took post horses.




Chapter XXXIV.
On the Eve of Battle.


Raoul was aroused from his sombre reflections by his host, who rushed
into the apartment crying out, “The Spaniards! the Spaniards!”

That cry was of such importance as to overcome all preoccupation. The
young men made inquiries and ascertained that the enemy was advancing
by way of Houdin and Bethune.

While Monsieur d’Arminges gave orders for the horses to be made ready
for departure, the two young men ascended to the upper windows of the
house and saw in the direction of Marsin and of Lens a large body of
infantry and cavalry. This time it was not a wandering troop of
partisans; it was an entire army. There was therefore nothing for them
to do but to follow the prudent advice of Monsieur d’Arminges and beat
a retreat. They quickly went downstairs. Monsieur d’Arminges was
already mounted. Olivain had ready the horses of the young men, and the
lackeys of the Count de Guiche guarded carefully between them the
Spanish prisoner, mounted on a pony which had been bought for his use.
As a further precaution they had bound his hands.

The little company started off at a trot on the road to Cambrin, where
they expected to find the prince. But he was no longer there, having
withdrawn on the previous evening to La Bassee, misled by false
intelligence of the enemy’s movements. Deceived by this intelligence he
had concentrated his forces between Vieille-Chapelle and La Venthie;
and after a reconnoissance along the entire line, in company with
Marshal de Grammont, he had returned and seated himself before a table,
with his officers around him. He questioned them as to the news they
had each been charged to obtain, but nothing positive had been learned.
The hostile army had disappeared two days before and seemed to have
gone out of existence.

Now an enemy is never so near and consequently so threatening, as when
he has completely disappeared. The prince was, therefore, contrary to
his custom, gloomy and anxious, when an officer entered and announced
to Marshal de Grammont that some one wished to see him.

The Duc de Grammont received permission from the prince by a glance and
went out. The prince followed him with his eyes and continued looking
at the door; no one ventured to speak, for fear of disturbing him.

Suddenly a dull and heavy noise was heard. The prince leaped to his
feet, extending his hand in the direction whence came the sound, there
was no mistaking it—it was the noise of cannon. Every one stood up.

At that moment the door opened.

“Monseigneur,” said Marshal de Grammont, with a radiant face, “will
your highness permit my son, Count de Guiche, and his traveling
companion, Viscount de Bragelonne, to come in and give news of the
enemy, whom they have found while we were looking for him?”

“What!” eagerly replied the prince, “will I permit? I not only permit,
I desire; let them come in.”

The marshal introduced the two young men and placed them face to face
with the prince.

“Speak, gentlemen,” said the prince, saluting them; “first speak; we
shall have time afterward for the usual compliments. The most urgent
thing now is to learn where the enemy is and what he is doing.”

It fell naturally to the Count de Guiche to make reply; not only was he
the elder, but he had been presented to the prince by his father.
Besides, he had long known the prince, whilst Raoul now saw him for the
first time. He therefore narrated to the prince what they had seen from
the inn at Mazingarbe.

Meanwhile Raoul closely observed the young general, already made so
famous by the battles of Rocroy, Fribourg, and Nordlingen.

Louis de Bourbon, Prince de Condé, who, since the death of his father,
Henri de Bourbon, was called, in accordance with the custom of that
period, Monsieur le Prince, was a young man, not more than twenty-six
or twenty-seven years old, with the eye of an eagle—agl’ occhi grifani,
as Dante says—aquiline nose, long, waving hair, of medium height, well
formed, possessed of all the qualities essential to the successful
soldier—that is to say, the rapid glance, quick decision, fabulous
courage. At the same time he was a man of elegant manners and strong
mind, so that in addition to the revolution he had made in war, by his
new contributions to its methods, he had also made a revolution at
Paris, among the young noblemen of the court, whose natural chief he
was and who, in distinction from the social leaders of the ancient
court, modeled after Bassompierre, Bellegarde and the Duke d’Angouleme,
were called the petits-maitres.

At the first words of the Count de Guiche, the prince, having in mind
the direction whence came the sound of cannon, had understood
everything. The enemy was marching upon Lens, with the intention,
doubtless, of securing possession of that town and separating from
France the army of France. But in what force was the enemy? Was it a
corps sent out to make a diversion? Was it an entire army? To this
question De Guiche could not respond.

Now, as these questions involved matters of gravest consequence, it was
these to which the prince had especially desired an answer, exact,
precise, positive.

Raoul conquered the very natural feeling of timidity he experienced and
approaching the prince:

“My lord,” he said, “will you permit me to hazard a few words on that
subject, which will perhaps relieve you of your uncertainty?”

The prince turned and seemed to cover the young man with a single
glance; he smiled on perceiving that he was a child hardly fifteen
years old.

“Certainly, monsieur, speak,” he said, softening his stern, accented
tones, as if he were speaking to a woman.

“My lord,” said Raoul, blushing, “might examine the Spanish prisoner.”

“Have you a Spanish prisoner?” cried the prince.

“Yes, my lord.”

“Ah, that is true,” said De Guiche; “I had forgotten it.”

“That is easily understood; it was you who took him, count,” said
Raoul, smiling.

The old marshal turned toward the viscount, grateful for that praise of
his son, whilst the prince exclaimed:

“The young man is right; let the prisoner be brought in.”

Meanwhile the prince took De Guiche aside and asked him how the
prisoner had been taken and who this young man was.

“Monsieur,” said the prince, turning toward Raoul, “I know that you
have a letter from my sister, Madame de Longueville; but I see that you
have preferred commending yourself to me by giving me good counsel.”

“My lord,” said Raoul, coloring up, “I did not wish to interrupt your
highness in a conversation so important as that in which you were
engaged with the count. But here is the letter.”

“Very well,” said the prince; “give it to me later. Here is the
prisoner; let us attend to what is most pressing.”

The prisoner was one of those military adventurers who sold their blood
to whoever would buy, and grew old in stratagems and spoils. Since he
had been taken he had not uttered a word, so that it was not known to
what country he belonged. The prince looked at him with unspeakable
distrust.

“Of what country are you?” asked the prince.

The prisoner muttered a few words in a foreign tongue.

“Ah! ah! it seems that he is a Spaniard. Do you speak Spanish,
Grammont?”

“Faith, my lord, but indifferently.”

“And I not at all,” said the prince, laughing. “Gentlemen,” he said,
turning to those who were near him “can any one of you speak Spanish
and serve me as interpreter?”

“I can, my lord,” said Raoul.

“Ah, you speak Spanish?”

“Enough, I think, to fulfill your highness’s wishes on this occasion.”

Meanwhile the prisoner had remained impassive and as if he had no
understanding of what was taking place.

“My lord asks of what country you are,” said the young man, in the
purest Castilian.

“Ich bin ein Deutscher,” replied the prisoner.

“What in the devil does he say?” asked the prince. “What new gibberish
is that?”

“He says he is German, my lord,” replied Raoul; “but I doubt it, for
his accent is bad and his pronunciation defective.”

“Then you speak German, also?” asked the prince.

“Yes, my lord.”

“Well enough to question him in that language?”

“Yes, my lord.”

“Question him, then.”

Raoul began the examination, but the result justified his opinion. The
prisoner did not understand, or seemed not to understand, what Raoul
said to him; and Raoul could hardly understand his replies, containing
a mixture of Flemish and Alsatian. However, amidst all the prisoner’s
efforts to elude a systematic examination, Raoul had recognized his
natural accent.

“Non siete Spagnuolo,” he said; “non siete Tedesco; siete Italiano.”

The prisoner started and bit his lips.

“Ah, that,” said the prince, “I understand that language thoroughly;
and since he is Italian I will myself continue the examination. Thank
you, viscount,” continued the prince, laughing, “and I appoint you from
this moment my interpreter.”

But the prisoner was not less unwilling to respond in Italian than in
the other languages; his aim was to elude the examination. Therefore,
he knew nothing either of the enemy’s numbers, or of those in command,
or of the purpose of the army.

“Very good,” said the prince, understanding the reason of that
ignorance; “the man was caught in the act of assassination and robbery;
he might have purchased his life by speaking; he doesn’t wish to speak.
Take him out and shoot him.”

The prisoner turned pale. The two soldiers who had brought him in took
him, each by one arm, and led him toward the door, whilst the prince,
turning to Marshal de Grammont, seemed to have already forgotten the
order he had given.

When he reached the threshold of the door the prisoner stopped. The
soldiers, who knew only their orders, attempted to force him along.

“One moment,” said the prisoner, in French. “I am ready to speak, my
lord.”

“Ah! ah!” said the prince, laughing, “I thought we should come to that.
I have a sure method of limbering tongues. Young men, take advantage of
it against the time when you may be in command.”

“But on condition,” continued the prisoner, “that your highness will
swear that my life shall be safe.”

“Upon my honor,” said the prince.

“Question, then, my lord.”

“Where did the army cross the Lys?”

“Between Saint-Venant and Aire.”

“By whom is it commanded?”

“By Count de Fuonsaldagna, General Beck and the archduke.”

“Of how many does it consist?”

“Eighteen thousand men and thirty-six cannon.”

“And its aim is?”

“Lens.”

“You see; gentlemen!” said the prince, turning with a triumphant air
toward Marshal de Grammont and the other officers.

“Yes, my lord,” said the marshal, “you have divined all that was
possible to human genius.”

“Recall Le Plessis, Bellievre, Villequier and D’Erlac,” said the
prince, “recall all the troops that are on this side of the Lys. Let
them hold themselves in readiness to march to-night. To-morrow,
according to all probability, we shall attack the enemy.”

“But, my lord,” said Marshal de Grammont, “consider that when we have
collected all our forces we shall have hardly thirteen thousand men.”

“Monsieur le marechal,” said the prince, with that wonderful glance
that was peculiar to him, “it is with small armies that great battles
are won.”

Then turning toward the prisoner, “Take away that man,” he said, “and
keep him carefully in sight. His life is dependent on the information
he has given us; if it is true, he shall be free; if false, let him be
shot.”

The prisoner was led away.

“Count de Guiche,” said the prince, “it is a long time since you saw
your father, remain here with him. Monsieur,” he continued, addressing
Raoul, “if you are not too tired, follow me.”

“To the end of the world, my lord!” cried Raoul, feeling an unknown
enthusiasm for that young general, who seemed to him so worthy of his
renown.

The prince smiled; he despised flatterers, but he appreciated
enthusiasts.

“Come, monsieur,” he said, “you are good in council, as we have already
discovered; to-morrow we shall know if you are good in action.”

“And I,” said the marshal, “what am I to do?”

“Wait here to receive the troops. I shall either return for them myself
or shall send a courier directing you to bring them to me. Twenty
guards, well mounted, are all that I shall need for my escort.”

“That is very few,” said the marshal.

“It is enough,” replied the prince. “Have you a good horse, Monsieur de
Bragelonne?”

“My horse was killed this morning, my lord, and I am mounted
provisionally on my lackey’s.”

“Choose for yourself in my stables the horse you like best. No false
modesty; take the best horse you can find. You will need it this
evening, perhaps; you will certainly need it to-morrow.”

Raoul didn’t wait to be told twice; he knew that with superiors,
especially when those superiors are princes, the highest politeness is
to obey without delay or argument; he went down to the stables, picked
out a pie-bald Andalusian horse, saddled and bridled it himself, for
Athos had advised him to trust no one with those important offices at a
time of danger, and went to rejoin the prince, who at that moment
mounted his horse.

“Now, monsieur,” he said to Raoul, “will you give me the letter you
have brought?”

Raoul handed the letter to the prince.

“Keep near me,” said the latter.

The prince threw his bridle over the pommel of the saddle, as he was
wont to do when he wished to have both hands free, unsealed the letter
of Madame de Longueville and started at a gallop on the road to Lens,
attended by Raoul and his small escort, whilst messengers sent to
recall the troops set out with a loose rein in other directions. The
prince read as he hastened on.

“Monsieur,” he said, after a moment, “they tell me great things of you.
I have only to say, after the little that I have seen and heard, that I
think even better of you than I have been told.”

Raoul bowed.

Meanwhile, as the little troop drew nearer to Lens, the noise of the
cannon sounded louder. The prince kept his gaze fixed in the direction
of the sound with the steadfastness of a bird of prey. One would have
said that his gaze could pierce the branches of trees which limited his
horizon. From time to time his nostrils dilated as if eager for the
smell of powder, and he panted like a horse.

At length they heard the cannon so near that it was evident they were
within a league of the field of battle, and at a turn of the road they
perceived the little village of Aunay.

The peasants were in great commotion. The report of Spanish cruelty had
gone out and every one was frightened. The women had already fled,
taking refuge in Vitry; only a few men remained. On seeing the prince
they hastened to meet him. One of them recognized him.

“Ah, my lord,” he said, “have you come to drive away those rascal
Spaniards and those Lorraine robbers?”

“Yes,” said the prince, “if you will serve me as guide.”

“Willingly, my lord. Where does your highness wish to go?”

“To some elevated spot whence I can look down on Lens and the
surrounding country——”

“In that case, I’m your man.”

“I can trust you—you are a true Frenchman?”

“I am an old soldier of Rocroy, my lord.”

“Here,” said the prince, handing him a purse, “here is for Rocroy. Now,
do you want a horse, or will you go afoot?”

“Afoot, my lord; I have served always in the infantry. Besides, I
expect to lead your highness into places where you will have to walk.”

“Come, then,” said the prince; “let us lose no time.”

The peasant started off, running before the prince’s horse; then, a
hundred steps from the village, he took a narrow road hidden at the
bottom of the valley. For a half league they proceeded thus, the
cannon-shot sounding so near that they expected at each discharge to
hear the hum of the balls. At length they entered a path which, going
out from the road, skirted the mountainside. The prince dismounted,
ordered one of his aids and Raoul to follow his example, and directed
the others to await his orders, keeping themselves meanwhile on the
alert. He then began to ascend the path.

In about ten minutes they reached the ruins of an old chateau; those
ruins crowned the summit of a hill which overlooked the surrounding
country. At a distance of hardly a quarter of a league they looked down
on Lens, at bay, and before Lens the enemy’s entire army.

With a single glance the prince took in the extent of country that lay
before him, from Lens as far as Vimy. In a moment the plan of the
battle which on the following day was to save France the second time
from invasion was unrolled in his mind. He took a pencil, tore a page
from his tablets and wrote:

“My Dear Marshal,—In an hour Lens will be in the enemy’s possession.
Come and rejoin me; bring with you the whole army. I shall be at Vendin
to place it in position. To-morrow we shall retake Lens and beat the
enemy.”

Then, turning toward Raoul: “Go, monsieur,” he said; “ride fast and
give this letter to Monsieur de Grammont.”

Raoul bowed, took the letter, went hastily down the mountain, leaped on
his horse and set out at a gallop. A quarter of an hour later he was
with the marshal.

A portion of the troops had already arrived and the remainder was
expected from moment to moment. Marshal de Grammont put himself at the
head of all the available cavalry and infantry and took the road to
Vendin, leaving the Duc de Chatillon to await and bring on the rest.
All the artillery was ready to move, and started off at a moment’s
notice.

It was seven o’clock in the evening when the marshal arrived at the
appointed place. The prince awaited him there. As he had foreseen, Lens
had fallen into the hands of the enemy immediately after Raoul’s
departure. The event was announced by the cessation of the firing.

As the shadows of night deepened the troops summoned by the prince
arrived in successive detachments. Orders were given that no drum
should be beaten, no trumpet sounded.

At nine o’clock the night had fully come. Still a last ray of twilight
lighted the plain. The army marched silently, the prince at the head of
the column. Presently the army came in sight of Lens; two or three
houses were in flames and a dull noise was heard which indicated what
suffering was endured by a town taken by assault.

The prince assigned to every one his post. Marshal de Grammont was to
hold the extreme left, resting on Mericourt. The Duc de Chatillon
commanded the centre. Finally, the prince led the right wing, resting
on Aunay. The order of battle on the morrow was to be that of the
positions taken in the evening. Each one, on awaking, would find
himself on the field of battle.

The movement was executed in silence and with precision. At ten o’clock
every one was in his appointed position; at half-past ten the prince
visited the posts and gave his final orders for the following day.

Three things were especially urged upon the officers, who were to see
that the soldiers observed them scrupulously: the first, that the
different corps should so march that cavalry and infantry should be on
the same line and that each body should protect its gaps; the second,
to go to the charge no faster than a walk; the third, to let the enemy
fire first.

The prince assigned the Count de Guiche to his father and kept
Bragelonne near his own person; but the two young men sought the
privilege of passing the night together and it was accorded them. A
tent was erected for them near that of the marshal.

Although the day had been fatiguing, neither of them was inclined to
sleep. And besides, even for old soldiers the evening before a battle
is a serious time; it was so with greater reason to two young men who
were about to witness for the first time that terrible spectacle. On
the evening before a battle one thinks of a thousand things forgotten
till then; those who are indifferent to one another become friends and
those who are friends become brothers. It need not be said that if in
the depths of the heart there is a sentiment more tender, it reaches
then, quite naturally, the highest exaltation of which it is capable.
Some sentiment of this kind must have been cherished by each one of
these two friends, for each of them almost immediately sat down by
himself at an end of the tent and began to write.

The letters were long—the four pages were covered with closely written
words. The writers sometimes looked up at each other and smiled; they
understood without speaking, their organizations were so delicate and
sympathetic. The letters being finished, each put his own into two
envelopes, so that no one, without tearing the first envelope, could
discover to whom the second was addressed; then they drew near to each
other and smilingly exchanged their letters.

“In case any evil should happen to me,” said Bragelonne.

“In case I should be killed,” said De Guiche.

They then embraced each other like two brothers, and each wrapping
himself in his cloak they soon passed into that kindly sleep of youth
which is the prerogative of birds, flowers and infants.




Chapter XXXV.
A Dinner in the Old Style.


The second interview between the former musketeers was not so formal
and threatening as the first. Athos, with his superior understanding,
wisely deemed that the supper table would be the most complete and
satisfactory point of reunion, and at the moment when his friends, in
deference to his deportment and sobriety, dared scarcely speak of some
of their former good dinners, he was the first to propose that they
should all assemble around some well spread table and abandon
themselves unreservedly to their own natural character and manners—a
freedom which had formerly contributed so much to that good
understanding between them which gave them the name of the
inseparables. For different reasons this was an agreeable proposition
to them all, and it was therefore agreed that each should leave a very
exact address and that upon the request of any of the associates a
meeting should be convoked at a famous eating house in the Rue de la
Monnaie, of the sign of the Hermitage. The first rendezvous was fixed
for the following Wednesday, at eight o’clock in the evening precisely.

On that day, in fact, the four friends arrived punctually at the hour,
each from his own abode or occupation. Porthos had been trying a new
horse; D’Artagnan was on guard at the Louvre; Aramis had been to visit
one of his penitents in the neighborhood; and Athos, whose domicile was
established in the Rue Guenegaud, found himself close at hand. They
were, therefore, somewhat surprised to meet altogether at the door of
the Hermitage, Athos starting out from the Pont Neuf, Porthos by the
Rue de la Roule, D’Artagnan by the Rue des Fosse Saint Germain
l’Auxerrois, and Aramis by the Rue de Bethisy.

The first words exchanged between the four friends, on account of the
ceremony which each of them mingled with their demonstration, were
somewhat forced and even the repast began with a kind of stiffness.
Athos perceived this embarrassment, and by way of supplying an
effectual remedy, called for four bottles of champagne.

At this order, given in Athos’s habitually calm manner, the face of the
Gascon relaxed and Porthos’s brow grew smooth. Aramis was astonished.
He knew that Athos not only never drank, but more, that he had a kind
of repugnance to wine. This astonishment was doubled when Aramis saw
Athos fill a bumper and toss it off with all his former enthusiasm. His
companions followed his example. In a very few minutes the four bottles
were empty and this excellent specific succeeded in dissipating even
the slightest cloud that might have rested on their spirits. Now the
four friends began to speak loud, scarcely waiting till one had
finished before another began, and each assumed his favorite attitude
on or at the table. Soon—strange fact—Aramis undid two buttons of his
doublet, seeing which, Porthos unfastened his entirely.

Battles, long journeys, blows given and received, sufficed for the
first themes of conversation, which turned upon the silent struggles
sustained against him who was now called the great cardinal.

“Faith,” said Aramis, laughing, “we have praised the dead enough, let
us revile the living a little; I should like to say something evil of
Mazarin; is it permissible?”

“Go on, go on,” replied D’Artagnan, laughing heartily; “relate your
story and I will applaud it if it is a good one.”

“A great prince,” said Aramis, “with whom Mazarin sought an alliance,
was invited by him to send him a list of the conditions on which he
would do him the honor to negotiate with him. The prince, who had a
great repugnance to treat with such an ill-bred fellow, made out a
list, against the grain, and sent it. In this list there were three
conditions which displeased Mazarin and he offered the prince ten
thousand crowns to renounce them.”

“Ah, ha, ha!” laughed the three friends, “not a bad bargain; and there
was no fear of being taken at his word; what did the prince do then?”

“The prince immediately sent fifty thousand francs to Mazarin, begging
him never to write to him again, and offered twenty thousand francs
more, on condition that he would never speak to him. What did Mazarin
do?”

“Stormed!” suggested Athos.

“Beat the messenger!” cried Porthos.

“Accepted the money!” said D’Artagnan.

“You have guessed it,” answered Aramis; and they all laughed so
heartily that the host appeared in order to inquire whether the
gentlemen wanted anything; he thought they were fighting.

At last their hilarity calmed down and:

“Faith!” exclaimed D’Artagnan to the two friends, “you may well wish
ill to Mazarin; for I assure you, on his side he wishes you no good.”

“Pooh! really?” asked Athos. “If I thought the fellow knew me by my
name I would be rebaptized, for fear it might be thought I knew him.”

“He knows you better by your actions than your name; he is quite aware
that there are two gentlemen who greatly aided the escape of Monsieur
de Beaufort, and he has instigated an active search for them, I can
answer for it.”

“By whom?”

“By me; and this morning he sent for me to ask me if I had obtained any
information.”

“And what did you reply?”

“That I had none as yet; but that I was to dine to-day with two
gentlemen, who would be able to give me some.”

“You told him that?” said Porthos, a broad smile spreading over his
honest face. “Bravo! and you are not afraid of that, Athos?”

“No,” replied Athos, “it is not the search of Mazarin that I fear.”

“Now,” said Aramis, “tell me a little what you do fear.”

“Nothing for the present; at least, nothing in good earnest.”

“And with regard to the past?” asked Porthos.

“Oh! the past is another thing,” said Athos, sighing; “the past and the
future.”

“Are you afraid for your young Raoul?” asked Aramis.

“Well,” said D’Artagnan, “one is never killed in a first engagement.”

“Nor in the second,” said Aramis

“Nor in the third,” returned Porthos; “and even when one is killed, one
rises again, the proof of which is, that here we are!”

“No,” said Athos, “it is not Raoul about whom I am anxious, for I trust
he will conduct himself like a gentleman; and if he is killed—well, he
will die bravely; but hold—should such a misfortune happen—well—” Athos
passed his hand across his pale brow.

“Well?” asked Aramis.

“Well, I shall look upon it as an expiation.”

“Ah!” said D’Artagnan; “I know what you mean.”

“And I, too,” added Aramis; “but you must not think of that, Athos;
what is past, is past.”

“I don’t understand,” said Porthos.

“The affair at Armentieres,” whispered D’Artagnan.

“The affair at Armentieres?” asked he again.

“Milady.”

“Oh, yes!” said Porthos; “true, I had forgotten it!”

Athos looked at him intently.

“You have forgotten it, Porthos?” said he.

“Faith! yes, it is so long ago,” answered Porthos.

“This affair does not, then, weigh upon your conscience?”

“Faith, no.”

“And you, D’Artagnan?”

“I—I own that when my mind returns to that terrible period I have no
recollection of anything but the rigid corpse of poor Madame
Bonancieux. Yes, yes,” murmured he, “I have often felt regret for the
victim, but never the very slightest remorse for the assassin.”

Athos shook his dead doubtfully.

“Consider,” said Aramis, “if you admit divine justice and its
participation in the things of this world, that woman was punished by
the will of heaven. We were but the instruments, that is all.”

“But as to free will, Aramis?”

“How acts the judge? He has a free will, yet he fearlessly condemns.
What does the executioner? He is master of his arm, yet he strikes
without remorse.”

“The executioner!” muttered Athos, as if arrested by some recollection.

“I know that it is terrible,” said D’Artagnan; “but when I reflect that
we have killed English, Rochellais, Spaniards, nay, even French, who
never did us any other harm but to aim at and to miss us, whose only
fault was to cross swords with us and to be unable to ward off our
blows—I can, on my honor, find an excuse for my share in the murder of
that woman.”

“As for me,” said Porthos, “now that you have reminded me of it, Athos,
I have the scene again before me, as if I now were there. Milady was
there, as it were, where you sit.” (Athos changed color.) “I—I was
where D’Artagnan stands. I wore a long sword which cut like a
Damascus—you remember it, Aramis for you always called it Balizarde.
Well, I swear to you, all three, that had the executioner of
Bethune—was he not of Bethune?—yes, egad! of Bethune!—not been there, I
would have cut off the head of that infamous being without thinking of
it, or even after thinking of it. She was a most atrocious woman.”

“And then,” said Aramis, with the tone of philosophical indifference
which he had assumed since he had belonged to the church and in which
there was more atheism than confidence in God, “what is the use of
thinking of it all? At the last hour we must confess this action and
God knows better than we can whether it is a crime, a fault, or a
meritorious deed. I repent of it? Egad! no. Upon my honor and by the
holy cross; I only regret it because she was a woman.”

“The most satisfactory part of the matter,” said D’Artagnan, “is that
there remains no trace of it.”

“She had a son,” observed Athos.

“Oh! yes, I know that,” said D’Artagnan, “and you mentioned it to me;
but who knows what has become of him? If the serpent be dead, why not
its brood? Do you think his uncle De Winter would have brought up that
young viper? De Winter probably condemned the son as he had done the
mother.”

“Then,” said Athos, “woe to De Winter, for the child had done no harm.”

“May the devil take me, if the child be not dead,” said Porthos. “There
is so much fog in that detestable country, at least so D’Artagnan
declares.”

Just as the quaint conclusion reached by Porthos was about to bring
back hilarity to faces now more or less clouded, hasty footsteps were
heard upon the stair and some one knocked at the door.

“Come in,” cried Athos.

“Please your honors,” said the host, “a person in a great hurry wishes
to speak to one of you.”

“To which of us?” asked all the four friends.

“To him who is called the Comte de la Fere.”

“It is I,” said Athos, “and what is the name of the person?”

“Grimaud.”

“Ah!” exclaimed Athos, turning pale. “Back already! What can have
happened, then, to Bragelonne?”

“Let him enter,” cried D’Artagnan; “let him come up.”

But Grimaud had already mounted the staircase and was waiting on the
last step; so springing into the room he motioned the host to leave it.
The door being closed, the four friends waited in expectation.
Grimaud’s agitation, his pallor, the sweat which covered his face, the
dust which soiled his clothes, all indicated that he was the messenger
of some important and terrible news.

“Your honors,” said he, “that woman had a child; that child has become
a man; the tigress had a little one, the tiger has roused himself; he
is ready to spring upon you—beware!”

Athos glanced around at his friends with a melancholy smile. Porthos
turned to look at his sword, which was hanging on the wall; Aramis
seized his knife; D’Artagnan arose.

“What do you mean, Grimaud?” he exclaimed.

“That Milady’s son has left England, that he is in France, on his road
to Paris, if he be not here already.”

“The devil he is!” said Porthos. “Are you sure of it?”

“Certain,” replied Grimaud.

This announcement was received in silence. Grimaud was so breathless,
so exhausted, that he had fallen back upon a chair. Athos filled a
beaker with champagne and gave it to him.

“Well, after all,” said D’Artagnan, “supposing that he lives, that he
comes to Paris; we have seen many other such. Let him come.”

“Yes,” echoed Porthos, glancing affectionately at his sword, still
hanging on the wall; “we can wait for him; let him come.”

“Moreover, he is but a child,” said Aramis.

Grimaud rose.

“A child!” he exclaimed. “Do you know what he has done, this child?
Disguised as a monk he discovered the whole history in confession from
the executioner of Bethune, and having confessed him, after having
learned everything from him, he gave him absolution by planting this
dagger into his heart. See, it is on fire yet with his hot blood, for
it is not thirty hours since it was drawn from the wound.”

And Grimaud threw the dagger on the table.

D’Artagnan, Porthos and Aramis rose and in one spontaneous motion
rushed to their swords. Athos alone remained seated, calm and
thoughtful.

“And you say he is dressed as a monk, Grimaud?”

“Yes, as an Augustine monk.”

“What sized man is he?”

“About my height; thin, pale, with light blue eyes and tawny flaxen
hair.”

“And he did not see Raoul?” asked Athos.

“Yes, on the contrary, they met, and it was the viscount himself who
conducted him to the bed of the dying man.”

Athos, in his turn, rising without speaking, went and unhooked his
sword.

“Heigh, sir,” said D’Artagnan, trying to laugh, “do you know we look
very much like a flock of silly, mouse-evading women! How is it that
we, four men who have faced armies without blinking, begin to tremble
at the mention of a child?”

“It is true,” said Athos, “but this child comes in the name of Heaven.”

And very soon they left the inn.




Chapter XXXVI.
A Letter from Charles the First.


The reader must now cross the Seine with us and follow us to the door
of the Carmelite Convent in the Rue Saint Jacques. It is eleven o’clock
in the morning and the pious sisters have just finished saying mass for
the success of the armies of King Charles I. Leaving the church, a
woman and a young girl dressed in black, the one as a widow and the
other as an orphan, have re-entered their cell.

The woman kneels on a prie-dieu of painted wood and at a short distance
from her stands the young girl, leaning against a chair, weeping.

The woman must have once been handsome, but traces of sorrow have aged
her. The young girl is lovely and her tears only embellish her; the
lady appears to be about forty years of age, the girl about fourteen.

“Oh, God!” prayed the kneeling suppliant, “protect my husband, guard my
son, and take my wretched life instead!”

“Oh, God!” murmured the girl, “leave me my mother!”

“Your mother can be of no use to you in this world, Henrietta,” said
the lady, turning around. “Your mother has no longer either throne or
husband; she has neither son, money nor friends; the whole world, my
poor child, has abandoned your mother!” And she fell back, weeping,
into her daughter’s arms.

“Courage, take courage, my dear mother!” said the girl.

“Ah! ’tis an unfortunate year for kings,” said the mother. “And no one
thinks of us in this country, for each must think about his own
affairs. As long as your brother was with me he kept me up; but he is
gone and can no longer send us news of himself, either to me or to your
father. I have pledged my last jewels, sold your clothes and my own to
pay his servants, who refused to accompany him unless I made this
sacrifice. We are now reduced to live at the expense of these daughters
of Heaven; we are the poor, succored by God.”

“But why not address yourself to your sister, the queen?” asked the
girl.

“Alas! the queen, my sister, is no longer queen, my child. Another
reigns in her name. One day you will be able to understand how all this
is.”

“Well, then, to the king, your nephew. Shall I speak to him? You know
how much he loves me, my mother.

“Alas! my nephew is not yet king, and you know Laporte has told us
twenty times that he himself is in need of almost everything.”

“Then let us pray to Heaven,” said the girl.

The two women who thus knelt in united prayer were the daughter and
grand-daughter of Henry IV., the wife and daughter of Charles I.

They had just finished their double prayer, when a nun softly tapped at
the door of the cell.

“Enter, my sister,” said the queen.

“I trust your majesty will pardon this intrusion on her meditations,
but a foreign lord has arrived from England and waits in the parlor,
demanding the honor of presenting a letter to your majesty.”

“Oh, a letter! a letter from the king, perhaps. News from your father,
do you hear, Henrietta? And the name of this lord?”

“Lord de Winter.”

“Lord de Winter!” exclaimed the queen, “the friend of my husband. Oh,
bid him enter!”

And the queen advanced to meet the messenger, whose hand she seized
affectionately, whilst he knelt down and presented a letter to her,
contained in a case of gold.

“Ah! my lord!” said the queen, “you bring us three things which we have
not seen for a long time. Gold, a devoted friend, and a letter from the
king, our husband and master.”

De Winter bowed again, unable to reply from excess of emotion.

On their side the mother and daughter retired into the embrasure of a
window to read eagerly the following letter:

“Dear Wife,—We have now reached the moment of decision. I have
concentrated here at Naseby camp all the resources Heaven has left me,
and I write to you in haste from thence. Here I await the army of my
rebellious subjects. I am about to struggle for the last time with
them. If victorious, I shall continue the struggle; if beaten, I am
lost. I shall try, in the latter case (alas! in our position, one must
provide for everything), I shall try to gain the coast of France. But
can they, will they receive an unhappy king, who will bring such a sad
story into a country already agitated by civil discord? Your wisdom and
your affection must serve me as guides. The bearer of this letter will
tell you, madame, what I dare not trust to pen and paper and the risks
of transit. He will explain to you the steps that I expect you to
pursue. I charge him also with my blessing for my children and with the
sentiments of my soul for yourself, my dearest sweetheart.”

The letter bore the signature, not of “Charles, King,” but of
“Charles—still king.”

“And let him be no longer king,” cried the queen. “Let him be
conquered, exiled, proscribed, provided he still lives. Alas! in these
days the throne is too dangerous a place for me to wish him to retain
it. But my lord, tell me,” she continued, “hide nothing from me—what
is, in truth, the king’s position? Is it as hopeless as he thinks?”

“Alas! madame, more hopeless than he thinks. His majesty has so good a
heart that he cannot understand hatred; is so loyal that he does not
suspect treason! England is torn in twain by a spirit of disturbance
which, I greatly fear, blood alone can exorcise.”

“But Lord Montrose,” replied the queen, “I have heard of his great and
rapid successes of battles gained. I heard it said that he was marching
to the frontier to join the king.”

“Yes, madame; but on the frontier he was met by Lesly; he had tried
victory by means of superhuman undertakings. Now victory has abandoned
him. Montrose, beaten at Philiphaugh, was obliged to disperse the
remains of his army and to fly, disguised as a servant. He is at
Bergen, in Norway.”

“Heaven preserve him!” said the queen. “It is at least a consolation to
know that some who have so often risked their lives for us are safe.
And now, my lord, that I see how hopeless the position of the king is,
tell me with what you are charged on the part of my royal husband.”

“Well, then, madame,” said De Winter, “the king wishes you to try and
discover the dispositions of the king and queen toward him.”

“Alas! you know that even now the king is but a child and the queen a
woman weak enough. Here, Monsieur Mazarin is everything.”

“Does he desire to play the part in France that Cromwell plays in
England?”

“Oh, no! He is a subtle, conscienceless Italian, who though he very
likely dreams of crime, dares not commit it; and unlike Cromwell, who
disposes of both Houses, Mazarin has had the queen to support him in
his struggle with the parliament.”

“More reason, then, he should protect a king pursued by parliament.”

The queen shook her head despairingly.

“If I judge for myself, my lord,” she said, “the cardinal will do
nothing, and will even, perhaps, act against us. The presence of my
daughter and myself in France is already irksome to him; much more so
would be that of the king. My lord,” added Henrietta, with a melancholy
smile, “it is sad and almost shameful to be obliged to say that we have
passed the winter in the Louvre without money, without linen, almost
without bread, and often not rising from bed because we wanted fire.”

“Horrible!” cried De Winter; “the daughter of Henry IV., and the wife
of King Charles! Wherefore did you not apply, then, madame, to the
first person you saw from us?”

“Such is the hospitality shown to a queen by the minister from whom a
king demands it.”

“But I heard that a marriage between the Prince of Wales and
Mademoiselle d’Orleans was spoken of,” said De Winter.

“Yes, for an instant I hoped it was so. The young people felt a mutual
esteem; but the queen, who at first sanctioned their affection, changed
her mind, and Monsieur, the Duc d’Orleans, who had encouraged the
familiarity between them, has forbidden his daughter to think any more
about the union. Oh, my lord!” continued the queen, without restraining
her tears, “it is better to fight as the king has done, and to die, as
perhaps he will, than live in beggary like me.”

“Courage, madame! courage! Do not despair! The interests of the French
crown, endangered at this moment, are to discountenance rebellion in a
neighboring nation. Mazarin, as a statesman, will understand the
politic necessity.”

“Are you sure,” said the queen doubtfully, “that you have not been
forestalled?”

“By whom?”

“By the Joices, the Prinns, the Cromwells?”

“By a tailor, a coachmaker, a brewer! Ah! I hope, madame, that the
cardinal will not enter into negotiations with such men!”

“Ah! what is he himself?” asked Madame Henrietta.

“But for the honor of the king—of the queen.”

“Well, let us hope he will do something for the sake of their honor,”
said the queen. “A true friend’s eloquence is so powerful, my lord,
that you have reassured me. Give me your hand and let us go to the
minister; and yet,” she added, “suppose he should refuse and that the
king loses the battle?”

“His majesty will then take refuge in Holland, where I hear his
highness the Prince of Wales now is.”

“And can his majesty count upon many such subjects as yourself for his
flight?”

“Alas! no, madame,” answered De Winter; “but the case is provided for
and I am come to France to seek allies.”

“Allies!” said the queen, shaking her head.

“Madame,” replied De Winter, “provided I can find some of my good old
friends of former times I will answer for anything.”

“Come then, my lord,” said the queen, with the painful doubt that is
felt by those who have suffered much; “come, and may Heaven hear you.”
