Chapter XLVI.
The Tower of St. Jacques de la Boucherie.


At a quarter to six o’clock, Monsieur de Gondy, having finished his
business, returned to the archiepiscopal palace.

At six o’clock the curate of St. Merri was announced.

The coadjutor glanced rapidly behind and saw that he was followed by
another man. The curate then entered, followed by Planchet.

“Your holiness,” said the curate, “here is the person of whom I had the
honor to speak to you.”

Planchet saluted in the manner of one accustomed to fine houses.

“And you are disposed to serve the cause of the people?” asked Gondy.

“Most undoubtedly,” said Planchet. “I am a Frondist from my heart. You
see in me, such as I am, a person sentenced to be hung.”

“And on what account?”

“I rescued from the hands of Mazarin’s police a noble lord whom they
were conducting back to the Bastile, where he had been for five years.”

“Will you name him?”

“Oh, you know him well, my lord—it is Count de Rochefort.”

“Ah! really, yes,” said the coadjutor, “I have heard this affair
mentioned. You raised the whole district, so they told me!”

“Very nearly,” replied Planchet, with a self-satisfied air.

“And your business is——”

“That of a confectioner, in the Rue des Lombards.”

“Explain to me how it happens that, following so peaceful a business,
you had such warlike inclinations.”

“Why does my lord, belonging to the church, now receive me in the dress
of an officer, with a sword at his side and spurs to his boots?”

“Not badly answered, i’faith,” said Gondy, laughing; “but I have, you
must know, always had, in spite of my bands, warlike inclinations.”

“Well, my lord, before I became a confectioner I myself was three years
sergeant in the Piedmontese regiment, and before I became sergeant I
was for eighteen months the servant of Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“The lieutenant of musketeers?” asked Gondy.

“Himself, my lord.”

“But he is said to be a furious Mazarinist.”

“Phew!” whistled Planchet.

“What do you mean by that?”

“Nothing, my lord; Monsieur d’Artagnan belongs to the service; Monsieur
d’Artagnan makes it his business to defend the cardinal, who pays him,
as much as we make it ours, we citizens, to attack him, whom he robs.”

“You are an intelligent fellow, my friend; can we count upon you?”

“You may count upon me, my lord, provided you want to make a complete
upheaval of the city.”

“’Tis that exactly. How many men, think you, you could collect together
to-night?”

“Two hundred muskets and five hundred halberds.”

“Let there be only one man in every district who can do as much and by
to-morrow we shall have quite a powerful army. Are you disposed to obey
Count de Rochefort?”

“I would follow him to hell, and that is saying not a little, as I
believe him entirely capable of the descent.”

“Bravo!”

“By what sign to-morrow shall we be able to distinguish friends from
foes?”

“Every Frondist must put a knot of straw in his hat.”

“Good! Give the watchword.”

“Do you want money?”

“Money never comes amiss at any time, my lord; if one has it not, one
must do without it; with it, matters go on much better and more
rapidly.”

Gondy went to a box and drew forth a bag.

“Here are five hundred pistoles,” he said; “and if the action goes off
well you may reckon upon a similar sum to-morrow.”

“I will give a faithful account of the sum to your lordship,” said
Planchet, putting the bag under his arm.

“That is right; I recommend the cardinal to your attention.”

“Make your mind easy, he is in good hands.”

Planchet went out, the curate remaining for a moment.

“Are you satisfied, my lord?” he asked.

“Yes; he appears to be a resolute fellow.”

“Well, he will do more than he has promised.”

“He will do wonders then.”

The curate rejoined Planchet, who was waiting for him on the stairs.
Ten minutes later the curate of St. Sulpice was announced. As soon as
the door of Gondy’s study was opened a man rushed in. It was the Count
de Rochefort.

“’Tis you, then, my dear count,” cried Gondy, offering his hand.

“You have made up your mind at last, my lord?” said Rochefort.

“It has been made up a long time,” said Gondy.

“Let us say no more on the subject; you tell me so, I believe you.
Well, we are going to give a ball to Mazarin.”

“I hope so.”

“And when will the dance begin?”

“The invitations are given for this evening,” said the coadjutor, “but
the violins will not begin to play until to-morrow morning.”

“You may reckon upon me and upon fifty soldiers which the Chevalier
d’Humieres has promised me whenever I need them.”

“Upon fifty soldiers?”

“Yes, he is making recruits and he will lend them to me; if any are
missing when the fete is over, I shall replace them.”

“Good, my dear Rochefort; but that is not all. What have you done with
Monsieur de Beaufort?”

“He is in Vendome, where he will wait until I write to him to return to
Paris.”

“Write to him; now’s the time.”

“You are sure of your enterprise?”

“Yes, but he must make haste; for hardly will the people of Paris have
revolted before we shall have a score of princes begging to lead them.
If he defers he will find the place of honor taken.”

“Shall I send word to him as coming from you?”

“Yes certainly.”

“Shall I tell him that he can count on you?”

“To the end.”

“And you will leave the command to him?”

“Of the war, yes, but in politics——”

“You must know it is not his element.”

“He must leave me to negotiate for my cardinal’s hat in my own
fashion.”

“You care about it, then, so much?”

“Since they force me to wear a hat of a form which does not become me,”
said Gondy, “I wish at least that the hat should be red.”

“One must not dispute matters of taste and colors,” said Rochefort,
laughing. “I answer for his consent.”

“How soon can he be here?”

“In five days.”

“Let him come and he will find a change, I will answer for it.”

“Therefore, go and collect your fifty men and hold yourself in
readiness.”

“For what?”

“For everything.”

“Is there any signal for the general rally?”

“A knot of straw in the hat.”

“Very good. Adieu, my lord.”

“Adieu, my dear Rochefort.”

“Ah, Monsieur Mazarin, Monsieur Mazarin,” said Rochefort, leading off
his curate, who had not found an opportunity of uttering a single word
during the foregoing dialogue, “you will see whether I am too old to be
a man of action.”

It was half-past nine o’clock and the coadjutor required half an hour
to go from the archbishop’s palace to the tower of St. Jacques de la
Boucherie. He remarked that a light was burning in one of the highest
windows of the tower. “Good,” said he, “our syndic is at his post.”

He knocked and the door was opened. The vicar himself awaited him,
conducted him to the top of the tower, and when there pointed to a
little door, placed the light which he had brought with him in a corner
of the wall, that the coadjutor might be able to find it on his return,
and went down again. Although the key was in the door the coadjutor
knocked.

“Come in,” said a voice which he recognized as that of the mendicant,
whom he found lying on a kind of truckle bed. He rose on the entrance
of the coadjutor, and at that moment ten o’clock struck.

“Well,” said Gondy, “have you kept your word with me?”

“Not exactly,” replied the mendicant.

“How is that?”

“You asked me for five hundred men, did you not? Well, I have ten
thousand for you.”

“You are not boasting?”

“Do you wish for a proof?”

“Yes.”

There were three candles alight, each of which burnt before a window,
one looking upon the city, the other upon the Palais Royal, and a third
upon the Rue Saint Denis.

The man went silently to each of the candles and blew them out one
after the other.

“What are you doing?” asked the coadjutor.

“I have given the signal.”

“For what?”

“For the barricades. When you leave this you will behold my men at
work. Only take care you do not break your legs in stumbling over some
chain or your neck by falling in a hole.”

“Good! there is your money, the same sum as that you have received
already. Now remember that you are a general and do not go and drink.”

“For twenty years I have tasted nothing but water.”

The man took the bag from the hands of the coadjutor, who heard the
sound of his fingers counting and handling the gold pieces.

“Ah! ah!” said the coadjutor, “you are avaricious, my good fellow.”

The mendicant sighed and threw down the bag.

“Must I always be the same?” said he, “and shall I never succeed in
overcoming the old leaven? Oh, misery, oh, vanity!”

“You take it, however.”

“Yes, but I make hereby a vow in your presence, to employ all that
remains to me in pious works.”

His face was pale and drawn, like that of a man who had just undergone
some inward struggle.

“Singular man!” muttered Gondy, taking his hat to go away; but on
turning around he saw the beggar between him and the door. His first
idea was that this man intended to do him some harm, but on the
contrary he saw him fall on his knees before him with his hands
clasped.

“Your blessing, your holiness, before you go, I beseech you!” he cried.

“Your holiness!” said Gondy; “my friend, you take me for some one
else.”

“No, your holiness, I take you for what you are, that is to say, the
coadjutor; I recognized you at the first glance.”

Gondy smiled. “And you want my blessing?” he said.

“Yes, I have need of it.”

The mendicant uttered these words in a tone of such humility, such
earnest repentance, that Gondy placed his hand upon him and gave him
his benediction with all the unction of which he was capable.

“Now,” said Gondy, “there is a communion between us. I have blessed you
and you are sacred to me. Come, have you committed some crime, pursued
by human justice, from which I can protect you?”

The beggar shook his head. “The crime which I have committed, my lord,
has no call upon human justice, and you can only deliver me from it by
blessing me frequently, as you have just done.”

“Come, be candid,” said the coadjutor, “you have not all your life
followed the trade which you do now?”

“No, my lord. I have pursued it for six years only.”

“And previously, where were you?”

“In the Bastile.”

“And before you went to the Bastile?”

“I will tell you, my lord, on the day when you are willing to hear my
confession.”

“Good! At whatsoever hour of the day or night you may present yourself,
remember that I shall be ready to give you absolution.”

“Thank you, my lord,” said the mendicant in a hoarse voice. “But I am
not yet ready to receive it.”

“Very well. Adieu.”

“Adieu, your holiness,” said the mendicant, opening the door and
bending low before the prelate.




Chapter XLVII.
The Riot.


It was about eleven o’clock at night. Gondy had not walked a hundred
steps ere he perceived the strange change which had been made in the
streets of Paris.

The whole city seemed peopled with fantastic beings; silent shadows
were seen unpaving the streets and others dragging and upsetting great
wagons, whilst others again dug ditches large enough to ingulf whole
regiments of horsemen. These active beings flitted here and there like
so many demons completing some unknown labor; these were the beggars of
the Court of Miracles—the agents of the giver of holy water in the
Square of Saint Eustache, preparing barricades for the morrow.

Gondy gazed on these deeds of darkness, on these nocturnal laborers,
with a kind of fear; he asked himself, if, after having called forth
these foul creatures from their dens, he should have the power of
making them retire again. He felt almost inclined to cross himself when
one of these beings happened to approach him. He reached the Rue Saint
Honore and went up it toward the Rue de la Ferronnerie; there the
aspect changed; here it was the tradesmen who were running from shop to
shop; their doors seemed closed like their shutters, but they were only
pushed to in such a manner as to open and allow the men, who seemed
fearful of showing what they carried, to enter, closing immediately.
These men were shopkeepers, who had arms to lend to those who had none.

One individual went from door to door, bending under the weight of
swords, guns, muskets and every kind of weapon, which he deposited as
fast as he could. By the light of a lantern the coadjutor recognized
Planchet.

The coadjutor proceeded onward to the quay by way of the Rue de la
Monnaie; there he found groups of bourgeois clad in black cloaks or
gray, according as they belonged to the upper or lower bourgeoisie.
They were standing motionless, while single men passed from one group
to another. All these cloaks, gray or black, were raised behind by the
point of a sword, or before by the barrel of an arquebuse or a musket.

On reaching the Pont Neuf the coadjutor found it strictly guarded and a
man approached him.

“Who are you?” asked the man. “I do not know you for one of us.”

“Then it is because you do not know your friends, my dear Monsieur
Louvieres,” said the coadjutor, raising his hat.

Louvieres recognized him and bowed.

Gondy continued his way and went as far as the Tour de Nesle. There he
saw a lengthy chain of people gliding under the walls. They might be
said to be a procession of ghosts, for they were all wrapped in white
cloaks. When they reached a certain spot these men appeared to be
annihilated, one after the other, as if the earth had opened under
their feet. Gondy, edged into a corner, saw them vanish from the first
until the last but one. The last raised his eyes, to ascertain,
doubtless, that neither his companions nor himself had been watched,
and, in spite of the darkness, he perceived Gondy. He walked straight
up to him and placed a pistol to his throat.

“Halloo! Monsieur de Rochefort,” said Gondy, laughing, “are you a boy
to play with firearms?”

Rochefort recognized the voice.

“Ah, it is you, my lord!” said he.

“The very same. What people are you leading thus into the bowels of the
earth?”

“My fifty recruits from the Chevalier d’Humieres, who are destined to
enter the light cavalry and who have only received as yet for their
equipment their white cloaks.”

“And where are you going?”

“To the house of one of my friends, a sculptor, only we enter by the
trap through which he lets down his marble.”

“Very good,” said Gondy, shaking Rochefort by the hand, who descended
in his turn and closed the trap after him.

It was now one o’clock in the morning and the coadjutor returned home.
He opened a window and leaned out to listen. A strange,
incomprehensible, unearthly sound seemed to pervade the whole city; one
felt that something unusual and terrible was happening in all the
streets, now dark as ocean’s most unfathomable caves. From time to time
a dull sound was heard, like that of a rising tempest or a billow of
the sea; but nothing clear, nothing distinct, nothing intelligible; it
was like those mysterious subterraneous noises that precede an
earthquake.

The work of revolt continued the whole night thus. The next morning, on
awaking, Paris seemed to be startled at her own appearance. It was like
a besieged town. Armed men, shouldering muskets, watched over the
barricades with menacing looks; words of command, patrols, arrests,
executions, even, were encountered at every step. Those bearing plumed
hats and gold swords were stopped and made to cry, “Long live
Broussel!” “Down with Mazarin!” and whoever refused to comply with this
ceremony was hooted at, spat upon and even beaten. They had not yet
begun to slay, but it was well felt that the inclination to do so was
not wanting.

The barricades had been pushed as far as the Palais Royal. From the Rue
de Bons Enfants to that of the Ferronnerie, from the Rue Saint
Thomas-du-Louvre to the Pont Neuf, from the Rue Richelieu to the Porte
Saint Honore, there were more than ten thousand armed men; those who
were at the front hurled defiance at the impassive sentinels of the
regiment of guards posted around the Palais Royal, the gates of which
were closed behind them, a precaution which made their situation
precarious. Among these thousands moved, in bands numbering from one
hundred to two hundred, pale and haggard men, clothed in rags, who bore
a sort of standard on which was inscribed these words: “Behold the
misery of the people!” Wherever these men passed, frenzied cries were
heard; and there were so many of these bands that the cries were to be
heard in all directions.

The astonishment of Mazarin and of Anne of Austria was great when it
was announced to them that the city, which the previous evening they
had left entirely tranquil, had awakened to such feverish commotion;
nor would either the one or the other believe the reports that were
brought to them, declaring they would rather rely on the evidence of
their own eyes and ears. Then a window was opened and when they saw and
heard they were convinced.

Mazarin shrugged his shoulders and pretended to despise the populace;
but he turned visibly pale and ran to his closet, trembling all over,
locked up his gold and jewels in his caskets and put his finest
diamonds on his fingers. As for the queen, furious, and left to her own
guidance, she went for the Marechal de la Meilleraie and desired him to
take as many men as he pleased and to go and see what was the meaning
of this pleasantry.

The marshal was ordinarily very adventurous and was wont to hesitate at
nothing; and he had that lofty contempt for the populace which army
officers usually profess. He took a hundred and fifty men and attempted
to go out by the Pont du Louvre, but there he met Rochefort and his
fifty horsemen, attended by more than five hundred men. The marshal
made no attempt to force that barrier and returned up the quay. But at
Pont Neuf he found Louvieres and his bourgeois. This time the marshal
charged, but he was welcomed by musket shots, while stones fell like
hail from all the windows. He left there three men.

He beat a retreat toward the market, but there he met Planchet with his
halberdiers; their halberds were leveled at him threateningly. He
attempted to ride over those gray cloaks, but the gray cloaks held
their ground and the marshal retired toward the Rue Saint Honore,
leaving four of his guards dead on the field of battle.

The marshal then entered the Rue Saint Honore, but there he was opposed
by the barricades of the mendicant of Saint Eustache. They were
guarded, not only by armed men, but even by women and children. Master
Friquet, the owner of a pistol and of a sword which Louvieres had given
him, had organized a company of rogues like himself and was making a
tremendous racket.

The marshal thought this barrier not so well fortified as the others
and determined to break through it. He dismounted twenty men to make a
breach in the barricade, whilst he and others, remaining on their
horses, were to protect the assailants. The twenty men marched straight
toward the barrier, but from behind the beams, from among the
wagon-wheels and from the heights of the rocks a terrible fusillade
burst forth and at the same time Planchet’s halberdiers appeared at the
corner of the Cemetery of the Innocents, and Louvieres’s bourgeois at
the corner of the Rue de la Monnaie.

The Marechal de la Meilleraie was caught between two fires, but he was
brave and made up his mind to die where he was. He returned blow for
blow and cries of pain began to be heard in the crowd. The guards, more
skillful, did greater execution; but the bourgeois, more numerous,
overwhelmed them with a veritable hurricane of iron. Men fell around
him as they had fallen at Rocroy or at Lerida. Fontrailles, his
aide-de-camp, had an arm broken; his horse had received a bullet in his
neck and he had difficulty in controlling him, maddened by pain. In
short, he had reached that supreme moment when the bravest feel a
shudder in their veins, when suddenly, in the direction of the Rue de
l’Arbre-Sec, the crowd opened, crying: “Long live the coadjutor!” and
Gondy, in surplice and cloak, appeared, moving tranquilly in the midst
of the fusillade and bestowing his benedictions to the right and left,
as undisturbed as if he were leading a procession of the Fete Dieu.

All fell to their knees. The marshal recognized him and hastened to
meet him.

“Get me out of this, in Heaven’s name!” he said, “or I shall leave my
carcass here and those of all my men.”

A great tumult arose, in the midst of which even the noise of thunder
could not have been heard. Gondy raised his hand and demanded silence.
All were still.

“My children,” he said, “this is the Marechal de la Meilleraie, as to
whose intentions you have been deceived and who pledges himself, on
returning to the Louvre, to demand of the queen, in your name, our
Broussel’s release. You pledge yourself to that, marshal?” added Gondy,
turning to La Meilleraie.

“Morbleu!” cried the latter, “I should say that I do pledge myself to
it! I had no hope of getting off so easily.”

“He gives you his word of honor,” said Gondy.

The marshal raised his hand in token of assent.

“Long live the coadjutor!” cried the crowd. Some voices even added:
“Long live the marshal!” But all took up the cry in chorus: “Down with
Mazarin!”

The crowd gave place, the barricade was opened, and the marshal, with
the remnant of his company, retreated, preceded by Friquet and his
bandits, some of them making a presence of beating drums and others
imitating the sound of the trumpet. It was almost a triumphal
procession; only, behind the guards the barricades were closed again.
The marshal bit his fingers.

In the meantime, as we have said, Mazarin was in his closet, putting
his affairs in order. He called for D’Artagnan, but in the midst of
such tumult he little expected to see him, D’Artagnan not being on
service. In about ten minutes D’Artagnan appeared at the door, followed
by the inseparable Porthos.

“Ah, come in, come in, Monsieur d’Artagnan!” cried the cardinal, “and
welcome your friend too. But what is going on in this accursed Paris?”

“What is going on, my lord? nothing good,” replied D’Artagnan, shaking
his head. “The town is in open revolt, and just now, as I was crossing
the Rue Montorgueil with Monsieur du Vallon, who is here, and is your
humble servant, they wanted in spite of my uniform, or perhaps because
of my uniform, to make us cry ‘Long live Broussel!’ and must I tell
you, my lord what they wished us to cry as well?”

“Speak, speak.”

“‘Down with Mazarin!’ I’faith, the treasonable word is out.”

Mazarin smiled, but became very pale.

“And you did cry?” he asked.

“I’faith, no,” said D’Artagnan; “I was not in voice; Monsieur du Vallon
has a cold and did not cry either. Then, my lord——”

“Then what?” asked Mazarin.

“Look at my hat and cloak.”

And D’Artagnan displayed four gunshot holes in his cloak and two in his
beaver. As for Porthos’s coat, a blow from a halberd had cut it open on
the flank and a pistol shot had cut his feather in two.

“Diavolo!” said the cardinal, pensively gazing at the two friends with
lively admiration; “I should have cried, I should.”

At this moment the tumult was heard nearer.

Mazarin wiped his forehead and looked around him. He had a great desire
to go to the window, but he dared not.

“See what is going on, Monsieur D’Artagnan,” said he.

D’Artagnan went to the window with his habitual composure. “Oho!” said
he, “what is this? Marechal de la Meilleraie returning without a
hat—Fontrailles with his arm in a sling—wounded guards—horses bleeding;
eh, then, what are the sentinels about? They are aiming—they are going
to fire!”

“They have received orders to fire on the people if the people approach
the Palais Royal!” exclaimed Mazarin.

“But if they fire, all is lost!” cried D’Artagnan.

“We have the gates.”

“The gates! to hold for five minutes—the gates, they will be torn down,
twisted into iron wire, ground to powder! God’s death, don’t fire!”
screamed D’Artagnan, throwing open the window.

In spite of this recommendation, which, owing to the noise, could
scarcely have been heard, two or three musket shots resounded,
succeeded by a terrible discharge. The balls might be heard peppering
the facade of the Palais Royal, and one of them, passing under
D’Artagnan’s arm, entered and broke a mirror, in which Porthos was
complacently admiring himself.

“Alack! alack!” cried the cardinal, “a Venetian glass!”

“Oh, my lord,” said D’Artagnan, quietly shutting the window, “it is not
worth while weeping yet, for probably an hour hence there will not be
one of your mirrors remaining in the Palais Royal, whether they be
Venetian or Parisian.”

“But what do you advise, then?” asked Mazarin, trembling.

“Eh, egad, to give up Broussel as they demand! What the devil do you
want with a member of the parliament? He is of no earthly use to
anybody.”

“And you, Monsieur du Vallon, is that your advice? What would you do?”

“I should give up Broussel,” said Porthos.

“Come, come with me, gentlemen!” exclaimed Mazarin. “I will go and
discuss the matter with the queen.”

He stopped at the end of the corridor and said:

“I can count upon you, gentlemen, can I not?”

“We do not give ourselves twice over,” said D’Artagnan; “we have given
ourselves to you; command, we shall obey.”

“Very well, then,” said Mazarin; “enter this cabinet and wait till I
come back.”

And turning off he entered the drawing-room by another door.




Chapter XLVIII.
The Riot becomes a Revolution.


The closet into which D’Artagnan and Porthos had been ushered was
separated from the drawing-room where the queen was by tapestried
curtains only, and this thin partition enabled them to hear all that
passed in the adjoining room, whilst the aperture between the two
hangings, small as it was, permitted them to see.

The queen was standing in the room, pale with anger; her self-control,
however, was so great that it might have been imagined that she was
calm. Comminges, Villequier and Guitant were behind her and the women
again were behind the men. The Chancellor Sequier, who twenty years
previously had persecuted her so ruthlessly, stood before her, relating
how his carriage had been smashed, how he had been pursued and had
rushed into the Hotel d’O——, that the hotel was immediately invaded,
pillaged and devastated; happily he had time to reach a closet hidden
behind tapestry, in which he was secreted by an old woman, together
with his brother, the Bishop of Meaux. Then the danger was so imminent,
the rioters came so near, uttering such threats, that the chancellor
thought his last hour had come and confessed himself to his brother
priest, so as to be all ready to die in case he was discovered.
Fortunately, however, he had not been taken; the people, believing that
he had escaped by some back entrance, retired and left him at liberty
to retreat. Then, disguised in the clothes of the Marquis d’O——, he had
left the hotel, stumbling over the bodies of an officer and two guards
who had been killed whilst defending the street door.

During the recital Mazarin entered and glided noiselessly up to the
queen to listen.

“Well,” said the queen, when the chancellor had finished speaking;
“what do you think of it all?”

“I think that matters look very gloomy, madame.”

“But what step would you propose to me?”

“I could propose one to your majesty, but I dare not.”

“You may, you may, sir,” said the queen with a bitter smile; “you were
not so timid once.”

The chancellor reddened and stammered some words.

“It is not a question of the past, but of the present,” said the queen;
“you said you could give me advice—what is it?”

“Madame,” said the chancellor, hesitating, “it would be to release
Broussel.”

The queen, although already pale, became visibly paler and her face was
contracted.

“Release Broussel!” she cried, “never!”

At this moment steps were heard in the ante-room and without any
announcement the Marechal de la Meilleraie appeared at the door.

“Ah, there you are, marechal,” cried Anne of Austria joyfully. “I trust
you have brought this rabble to reason.”

“Madame,” replied the marechal, “I have left three men on the Pont
Neuf, four at the Halle, six at the corner of the Rue de l’Arbre-Sec
and two at the door of your palace—fifteen in all. I have brought away
ten or twelve wounded. I know not where I have left my hat, and in all
probability I should have been left with my hat, had the coadjutor not
arrived in time to rescue me.”

“Ah, indeed,” said the queen, “it would have much astonished me if that
low cur, with his distorted legs, had not been mixed up with all this.”

“Madame,” said La Meilleraie, “do not say too much against him before
me, for the service he rendered me is still fresh.”

“Very good,” said the queen, “be as grateful as you like, it does not
implicate me; you are here safe and sound, that is all I wished for;
you are not only welcome, but welcome back.”

“Yes, madame; but I only came back on one condition—that I would
transmit to your majesty the will of the people.”

“The will!” exclaimed the queen, frowning. “Oh! oh! monsieur marechal,
you must indeed have found yourself in wondrous peril to have
undertaken so strange a commission!”

The irony with which these words were uttered did not escape the
marechal.

“Pardon, madame,” he said, “I am not a lawyer, I am a mere soldier, and
probably, therefore, I do not quite comprehend the value of certain
words; I ought to have said the wishes, and not the will, of the
people. As for what you do me the honor to say, I presume you mean I
was afraid?”

The queen smiled.

“Well, then, madame, yes, I did feel fear; and though I have been
through twelve pitched battles and I cannot count how many charges and
skirmishes, I own for the third time in my life I was afraid. Yes, and
I would rather face your majesty, however threatening your smile, than
face those demons who accompanied me hither and who sprung from I know
not whence, unless from deepest hell.”

(“Bravo,” said D’Artagnan in a whisper to Porthos; “well answered.”)

“Well,” said the queen, biting her lips, whilst her courtiers looked at
each other with surprise, “what is the desire of my people?”

“That Broussel shall be given up to them, madame.”

“Never!” said the queen, “never!”

“Your majesty is mistress,” said La Meilleraie, retreating a few steps.

“Where are you going, marechal?” asked the queen.

“To give your majesty’s reply to those who await it.”

“Stay, marechal; I will not appear to parley with rebels.”

“Madame, I have pledged my word, and unless you order me to be arrested
I shall be forced to return.”

Anne of Austria’s eyes shot glances of fire.

“Oh! that is no impediment, sir,” said she; “I have had greater men
than you arrested—Guitant!”

Mazarin sprang forward.

“Madame,” said he, “if I dared in my turn advise——”

“Would it be to give up Broussel, sir? If so, you can spare yourself
the trouble.”

“No,” said Mazarin; “although, perhaps, that counsel is as good as any
other.”

“Then what may it be?”

“To call for monsieur le coadjuteur.”

“The coadjutor!” cried the queen, “that dreadful mischief maker! It is
he who has raised all this revolt.”

“The more reason,” said Mazarin; “if he has raised it he can put it
down.”

“And hold, madame,” suggested Comminges, who was near a window, out of
which he could see; “hold, the moment is a happy one, for there he is
now, giving his blessing in the square of the Palais Royal.”

The queen sprang to the window.

“It is true,” she said, “the arch hypocrite—see!”

“I see,” said Mazarin, “that everybody kneels before him, although he
be but coadjutor, whilst I, were I in his place, though I am cardinal,
should be torn to pieces. I persist, then, madame, in my wish” (he laid
an emphasis on the word), “that your majesty should receive the
coadjutor.”

“And wherefore do you not say, like the rest, your will?” replied the
queen, in a low voice.

Mazarin bowed.

“Monsieur le marechal,” said the queen, after a moment’s reflection,
“go and find the coadjutor and bring him to me.”

“And what shall I say to the people?”

“That they must have patience,” said Anne, “as I have.”

The fiery Spanish woman spoke in a tone so imperative that the marechal
made no reply; he bowed and went out.

(D’Artagnan turned to Porthos. “How will this end?” he said.

“We shall soon see,” said Porthos, in his tranquil way.)

In the meantime Anne of Austria approached Comminges and conversed with
him in a subdued tone, whilst Mazarin glanced uneasily at the corner
occupied by D’Artagnan and Porthos. Ere long the door opened and the
marechal entered, followed by the coadjutor.

“There, madame,” he said, “is Monsieur Gondy, who hastens to obey your
majesty’s summons.”

The queen advanced a few steps to meet him, and then stopped, cold,
severe, unmoved, with her lower lip scornfully protruded.

Gondy bowed respectfully.

“Well, sir,” said the queen, “what is your opinion of this riot?”

“That it is no longer a riot, madame,” he replied, “but a revolt.”

“The revolt is at the door of those who think my people can rebel,”
cried Anne, unable to dissimulate before the coadjutor, whom she looked
upon, and probably with reason, as the promoter of the tumult. “Revolt!
thus it is called by those who have wished for this demonstration and
who are, perhaps, the cause of it; but, wait, wait! the king’s
authority will put all this to rights.”

“Was it to tell me that, madame,” coldly replied Gondy, “that your
majesty admitted me to the honor of entering your presence?”

“No, my dear coadjutor,” said Mazarin; “it was to ask your advice in
the unhappy dilemma in which we find ourselves.”

“Is it true,” asked Gondy, feigning astonishment, “that her majesty
summoned me to ask for my opinion?”

“Yes,” said the queen, “it is requested.”

The coadjutor bowed.

“Your majesty wishes, then——”

“You to say what you would do in her place,” Mazarin hastened to reply.

The coadjutor looked at the queen, who replied by a sign in the
affirmative.

“Were I in her majesty’s place,” said Gondy, coldly, “I should not
hesitate; I should release Broussel.”

“And if I do not give him up, what think you will be the result?”
exclaimed the queen.

“I believe that not a stone in Paris will remain unturned,” put in the
marechal.

“It was not your opinion that I asked,” said the queen, sharply,
without even turning around.

“If it is I whom your majesty interrogates,” replied the coadjutor in
the same calm manner, “I reply that I hold monsieur le marechal’s
opinion in every respect.”

The color mounted to the queen’s face; her fine blue eyes seemed to
start out of her head and her carmine lips, compared by all the poets
of the day to a pomegranate in flower, were trembling with anger.
Mazarin himself, who was well accustomed to the domestic outbreaks of
this disturbed household, was alarmed.

“Give up Broussel!” she cried; “fine counsel, indeed. Upon my word! one
can easily see it comes from a priest.”

Gondy remained firm, and the abuse of the day seemed to glide over his
head as the sarcasms of the evening before had done; but hatred and
revenge were accumulating in his heart silently and drop by drop. He
looked coldly at the queen, who nudged Mazarin to make him say
something in his turn.

Mazarin, according to his custom, was thinking much and saying little.

“Ho! ho!” said he, “good advice, advice of a friend. I, too, would give
up that good Monsieur Broussel, dead or alive, and all would be at an
end.”

“If you yield him dead, all will indeed be at an end, my lord, but
quite otherwise than you mean.”

“Did I say ‘dead or alive?’” replied Mazarin. “It was only a way of
speaking. You know I am not familiar with the French language, which
you, monsieur le coadjuteur, both speak and write so well.”

(“This is a council of state,” D’Artagnan remarked to Porthos; “but we
held better ones at La Rochelle, with Athos and Aramis.”

“At the Saint Gervais bastion,” said Porthos.

“There and elsewhere.”)

The coadjutor let the storm pass over his head and resumed, still with
the same tranquillity:

“Madame, if the opinion I have submitted to you does not please you it
is doubtless because you have better counsels to follow. I know too
well the wisdom of the queen and that of her advisers to suppose that
they will leave the capital long in trouble that may lead to a
revolution.”

“Thus, then, it is your opinion,” said Anne of Austria, with a sneer
and biting her lips with rage, “that yesterday’s riot, which to-day is
already a rebellion, to-morrow may become a revolution?”

“Yes, madame,” replied the coadjutor, gravely.

“But if I am to believe you, sir, the people seem to have thrown off
all restraint.”

“It is a bad year for kings,” said Gondy, shaking his head; “look at
England, madame.”

“Yes; but fortunately we have no Oliver Cromwell in France,” replied
the queen.

“Who knows?” said Gondy; “such men are like thunderbolts—one recognizes
them only when they have struck.”

Every one shuddered and there was a moment of silence, during which the
queen pressed her hand to her side, evidently to still the beatings of
her heart.

(“Porthos,” murmured D’Artagnan, “look well at that priest.”

“Yes,” said Porthos, “I see him. What then?”

“Well, he is a man.”

Porthos looked at D’Artagnan in astonishment. Evidently he did not
understand his meaning.)

“Your majesty,” continued the coadjutor, pitilessly, “is about to take
such measures as seem good to you, but I foresee that they will be
violent and such as will still further exasperate the rioters.”

“In that case, you, monsieur le coadjuteur, who have such power over
them and are at the same time friendly to us,” said the queen,
ironically, “will quiet them by bestowing your blessing upon them.”

“Perhaps it will be too late,” said Gondy, still unmoved; “perhaps I
shall have lost all influence; while by giving up Broussel your majesty
will strike at the root of the sedition and will gain the right to
punish severely any revival of the revolt.”

“Have I not, then, that right?” cried the queen.

“If you have it, use it,” replied Gondy.

(“Peste!” said D’Artagnan to Porthos. “There is a man after my own
heart. Oh! if he were minister and I were his D’Artagnan, instead of
belonging to that beast of a Mazarin, mordieu! what fine things we
would do together!”

“Yes,” said Porthos.)

The queen made a sign for every one, except Mazarin, to quit the room;
and Gondy bowed, as if to leave with the rest.

“Stay, sir,” said Anne to him.

“Good,” thought Gondy, “she is going to yield.”

(“She is going to have him killed,” said D’Artagnan to Porthos, “but at
all events it shall not be by me. I swear to Heaven, on the contrary,
that if they fall upon him I will fall upon them.”

“And I, too,” said Porthos.)

“Good,” muttered Mazarin, sitting down, “we shall soon see something
startling.”

The queen’s eyes followed the retreating figures and when the last had
closed the door she turned away. It was evident that she was making
unnatural efforts to subdue her anger; she fanned herself, smelled at
her vinaigrette and walked up and down. Gondy, who began to feel
uneasy, examined the tapestry with his eyes, touched the coat of mail
which he wore under his long gown and felt from time to time to see if
the handle of a good Spanish dagger, which was hidden under his cloak,
was well within reach.

“And now,” at last said the queen, “now that we are alone, repeat your
counsel, monsieur le coadjuteur.”

“It is this, madame: that you should appear to have reflected, and
publicly acknowledge an error, which constitutes the extra strength of
a strong government; release Broussel from prison and give him back to
the people.”

“Oh!” cried Anne, “to humble myself thus! Am I, or am I not, the queen?
This screaming mob, are they, or are they not, my subjects? Have I
friends? Have I guards? Ah! by Notre Dame! as Queen Catherine used to
say,” continued she, excited by her own words, “rather than give up
this infamous Broussel to them I will strangle him with my own hands!”

And she sprang toward Gondy, whom assuredly at that moment she hated
more than Broussel, with outstretched arms. The coadjutor remained
immovable and not a muscle of his face was discomposed; only his glance
flashed like a sword in returning the furious looks of the queen.

(“He were a dead man” said the Gascon, “if there were still a Vitry at
the court and if Vitry entered at this moment; but for my part, before
he could reach the good prelate I would kill Vitry at once; the
cardinal would be infinitely pleased with me.”

“Hush!” said Porthos; “listen.”)

“Madame,” cried the cardinal, seizing hold of Anne and drawing her
back, “Madame, what are you about?”

Then he added in Spanish, “Anne, are you mad? You, a queen to quarrel
like a washerwoman! And do you not perceive that in the person of this
priest is represented the whole people of Paris and that it is
dangerous to insult him at this moment, and if this priest wished it,
in an hour you would be without a crown? Come, then, on another
occasion you can be firm and strong; but to-day is not the proper time;
to-day, flatter and caress, or you are only a common woman.”

(At the first words of this address D’Artagnan had seized Porthos’s
arm, which he pressed with gradually increasing force. When Mazarin
ceased speaking he said to Porthos in a low tone:

“Never tell Mazarin that I understand Spanish, or I am a lost man and
you are also.”

“All right,” said Porthos.)

This rough appeal, marked by the eloquence which characterized Mazarin
when he spoke in Italian or Spanish and which he lost entirely in
speaking French, was uttered with such impenetrable expression that
Gondy, clever physiognomist as he was, had no suspicion of its being
more than a simple warning to be more subdued.

The queen, on her part, thus chided, softened immediately and sat down,
and in an almost weeping voice, letting her arms fall by her side,
said:

“Pardon me, sir, and attribute this violence to what I suffer. A woman,
and consequently subject to the weaknesses of my sex, I am alarmed at
the idea of civil war; a queen, accustomed to be obeyed, I am excited
at the first opposition.”

“Madame,” replied Gondy, bowing, “your majesty is mistaken in
qualifying my sincere advice as opposition. Your majesty has none but
submissive and respectful subjects. It is not the queen with whom the
people are displeased; they ask for Broussel and are only too happy, if
you release him to them, to live under your government.”

Mazarin, who at the words, “It is not the queen with whom the people
are displeased,” had pricked up his ears, thinking that the coadjutor
was about to speak of the cries, “Down with Mazarin,” and pleased with
Gondy’s suppression of this fact, he said with his sweetest voice and
his most gracious expression:

“Madame, credit the coadjutor, who is one of the most able politicians
we have; the first available cardinal’s hat seems to belong already to
his noble brow.”

“Ah! how much you have need of me, cunning rogue!” thought Gondy.

(“And what will he promise us?” said D’Artagnan. “Peste, if he is
giving away hats like that, Porthos, let us look out and both demand a
regiment to-morrow. Corbleu! let the civil war last but one year and I
will have a constable’s sword gilt for me.”

“And for me?” put in Porthos.

“For you? I will give you the baton of the Marechal de la Meilleraie,
who does not seem to be much in favor just now.”)

“And so, sir,” said the queen, “you are seriously afraid of a public
tumult.”

“Seriously,” said Gondy, astonished at not having further advanced; “I
fear that when the torrent has broken its embankment it will cause
fearful destruction.”

“And I,” said the queen, “think that in such a case other embankments
should be raised to oppose it. Go; I will reflect.”

Gondy looked at Mazarin, astonished, and Mazarin approached the queen
to speak to her, but at this moment a frightful tumult arose from the
square of the Palais Royal.

Gondy smiled, the queen’s color rose and Mazarin grew even paler.

“What is that again?” he asked.

At this moment Comminges rushed into the room.

“Pardon, your majesty,” he cried, “but the people have dashed the
sentinels against the gates and they are now forcing the doors; what
are your commands?”

“Listen, madame,” said Gondy.

The moaning of waves, the noise of thunder, the roaring of a volcano,
cannot be compared with the tempest of cries heard at that moment.

“What are my commands?” said the queen.

“Yes, for time presses.”

“How many men have you about the Palais Royal?”

“Six hundred.”

“Place a hundred around the king and with the remainder sweep away this
mob for me.”

“Madame,” cried Mazarin, “what are you about?”

“Go!” said the queen.

Comminges went out with a soldier’s passive obedience.

At this moment a monstrous battering was heard. One of the gates began
to yield.

“Oh! madame,” cried Mazarin, “you have ruined us all—the king, yourself
and me.”

At this cry from the soul of the frightened cardinal, Anne became
alarmed in her turn and would have recalled Comminges.

“It is too late,” said Mazarin, tearing his hair, “too late!”

The gale had given way. Hoarse shouts were heard from the excited mob.
D’Artagnan put his hand to his sword, motioning to Porthos to follow
his example.

“Save the queen!” cried Mazarin to the coadjutor.

Gondy sprang to the window and threw it open; he recognized Louvieres
at the head of a troop of about three or four thousand men.

“Not a step further,” he shouted, “the queen is signing!”

“What are you saying?” asked the queen.

“The truth, madame,” said Mazarin, placing a pen and a paper before
her, “you must;” then he added: “Sign, Anne, I implore you—I command
you.”

The queen fell into a chair, took the pen and signed.

The people, kept back by Louvieres, had not made another step forward;
but the awful murmuring, which indicates an angry people, continued.

The queen had written, “The keeper of the prison at Saint Germain will
set Councillor Broussel at liberty;” and she had signed it.

The coadjutor, whose eyes devoured her slightest movements, seized the
paper immediately the signature had been affixed to it, returned to the
window and waved it in his hand.

“This is the order,” he said.

All Paris seemed to shout with joy, and then the air resounded with the
cries of “Long live Broussel!” “Long live the coadjutor!”

“Long live the queen!” cried De Gondy; but the cries which replied to
his were poor and few, and perhaps he had but uttered it to make Anne
of Austria sensible of her weakness.

“And now that you have obtained what you want, go,” said she, “Monsieur
de Gondy.”

“Whenever her majesty has need of me,” replied the coadjutor, bowing,
“her majesty knows I am at her command.”

“Ah, cursed priest!” cried Anne, when he had retired, stretching out
her arm to the scarcely closed door, “one day I will make you drink the
dregs of the atrocious gall you have poured out on me to-day.”

Mazarin wished to approach her. “Leave me!” she exclaimed; “you are not
a man!” and she went out of the room.

“It is you who are not a woman,” muttered Mazarin.

Then, after a moment of reverie, he remembered where he had left
D’Artagnan and Porthos and that they must have overheard everything. He
knit his brows and went direct to the tapestry, which he pushed aside.
The closet was empty.

At the queen’s last word, D’Artagnan had dragged Porthos into the
gallery. Thither Mazarin went in his turn and found the two friends
walking up and down.

“Why did you leave the closet, Monsieur d’Artagnan?” asked the
cardinal.

“Because,” replied D’Artagnan, “the queen desired every one to leave
and I thought that this command was intended for us as well as for the
rest.”

“And you have been here since——”

“About a quarter of an hour,” said D’Artagnan, motioning to Porthos not
to contradict him.

Mazarin saw the sign and remained convinced that D’Artagnan had seen
and heard everything; but he was pleased with his falsehood.

“Decidedly, Monsieur d’Artagnan, you are the man I have been seeking.
You may reckon upon me and so may your friend.” Then bowing to the two
musketeers with his most gracious smile, he re-entered his closet more
calmly, for on the departure of De Gondy the uproar had ceased as
though by enchantment.




Chapter XLIX.
Misfortune refreshes the Memory.


Anne of Austria returned to her oratory, furious.

“What!” she cried, wringing her beautiful hands, “What! the people have
seen Monsieur de Condé, a prince of the blood royal, arrested by my
mother-in-law, Maria de Medicis; they saw my mother-in-law, their
former regent, expelled by the cardinal; they saw Monsieur de Vendome,
that is to say, the son of Henry IV., a prisoner at Vincennes; and
whilst these great personages were imprisoned, insulted and threatened,
they said nothing; and now for a Broussel—good God! what, then, is to
become of royalty?”

The queen unconsciously touched here upon the exciting question. The
people had made no demonstration for the princes, but they had risen
for Broussel; they were taking the part of a plebeian and in defending
Broussel they instinctively felt they were defending themselves.

During this time Mazarin walked up and down the study, glancing from
time to time at his beautiful Venetian mirror, starred in every
direction. “Ah!” he said, “it is sad, I know well, to be forced to
yield thus; but, pshaw! we shall have our revenge. What matters it
about Broussel—it is a name, not a thing.”

Mazarin, clever politician as he was, was for once mistaken; Broussel
was a thing, not a name.

The next morning, therefore, when Broussel made his entrance into Paris
in a large carriage, having his son Louvieres at his side and Friquet
behind the vehicle, the people threw themselves in his way and cries of
“Long live Broussel!” “Long live our father!” resounded from all parts
and was death to Mazarin’s ears; and the cardinal’s spies brought bad
news from every direction, which greatly agitated the minister, but was
calmly received by the queen. The latter seemed to be maturing in her
mind some great stroke, a fact which increased the uneasiness of the
cardinal, who knew the proud princess and dreaded much the
determination of Anne of Austria.

The coadjutor returned to parliament more a monarch than king, queen,
and cardinal, all three together. By his advice a decree from
parliament summoned the citizens to lay down their arms and demolish
the barricades. They now knew that it required but one hour to take up
arms again and one night to reconstruct the barricades.

Rochefort had returned to the Chevalier d’Humieres his fifty horsemen,
less two, missing at roll call. But the chevalier was himself at heart
a Frondist and would hear nothing said of compensation.

The mendicant had gone to his old place on the steps of Saint Eustache
and was again distributing holy water with one hand and asking alms
with the other. No one could suspect that those two hands had been
engaged with others in drawing out from the social edifice the keystone
of royalty.

Louvieres was proud and satisfied; he had taken revenge on Mazarin and
had aided in his father’s deliverance from prison. His name had been
mentioned as a name of terror at the Palais Royal. Laughingly he said
to the councillor, restored to his family:

“Do you think, father, that if now I should ask for a company the queen
would give it to me?”

D’Artagnan profited by this interval of calm to send away Raoul, whom
he had great difficulty in keeping shut up during the riot, and who
wished positively to strike a blow for one party or the other. Raoul
had offered some opposition at first; but D’Artagnan made use of the
Comte de la Fere’s name, and after paying a visit to Madame de
Chevreuse, Raoul started to rejoin the army.

Rochefort alone was dissatisfied with the termination of affairs. He
had written to the Duc de Beaufort to come and the duke was about to
arrive, and he would find Paris tranquil. He went to the coadjutor to
consult with him whether it would not be better to send word to the
duke to stop on the road, but Gondy reflected for a moment, and then
said:

“Let him continue his journey.”

“All is not then over?” asked Rochefort.

“My dear count, we have only just begun.”

“What induces you to think so?”

“The knowledge that I have of the queen’s heart; she will not rest
contented beaten.”

“Is she, then, preparing for a stroke?”

“I hope so.”

“Come, let us see what you know.”

“I know that she has written to the prince to return in haste from the
army.”

“Ah! ha!” said Rochefort, “you are right. We must let Monsieur de
Beaufort come.”

In fact, the evening after this conversation the report was circulated
that the Prince de Condé had arrived. It was a very simple, natural
circumstance and yet it created a profound sensation. It was said that
Madame de Longueville, for whom the prince had more than a brother’s
affection and in whom he had confided, had been indiscreet. His
confidence had unveiled the sinister project of the queen.

Even on the night of the prince’s return, some citizens, bolder than
the rest, such as the sheriffs, captains and the quartermaster, went
from house to house among their friends, saying:

“Why do we not take the king and place him in the Hotel de Ville? It is
a shame to leave him to be educated by our enemies, who will give him
evil counsel; whereas, brought up by the coadjutor, for instance, he
would imbibe national principles and love his people.”

That night the question was secretly agitated and on the morrow the
gray and black cloaks, the patrols of armed shop-people, and the bands
of mendicants reappeared.

The queen had passed the night in lonely conference with the prince,
who had entered the oratory at midnight and did not leave till five
o’clock in the morning.

At five o’clock Anne went to the cardinal’s room. If she had not yet
taken any repose, he at least was already up. Six days had already
passed out of the ten he had asked from Mordaunt; he was therefore
occupied in revising his reply to Cromwell, when some one knocked
gently at the door of communication with the queen’s apartments. Anne
of Austria alone was permitted to enter by that door. The cardinal
therefore rose to open it.

The queen was in a morning gown, but it became her still; for, like
Diana of Poictiers and Ninon, Anne of Austria enjoyed the privilege of
remaining ever beautiful; nevertheless, this morning she looked
handsomer than usual, for her eyes had all the sparkle inward
satisfaction adds to expression.

“What is the matter, madame?” said Mazarin, uneasily. “You seem
secretly elated.”

“Yes, Giulio,” she said, “proud and happy; for I have found the means
of strangling this hydra.”

“You are a great politician, my queen,” said Mazarin; “let us hear the
means.” And he hid what he had written by sliding the letter under a
folio of blank paper.

“You know,” said the queen, “that they want to take the king away from
me?”

“Alas! yes, and to hang me.”

“They shall not have the king.”

“Nor hang me.”

“Listen. I want to carry off my son from them, with yourself. I wish
that this event, which on the day it is known will completely change
the aspect of affairs, should be accomplished without the knowledge of
any others but yourself, myself, and a third person.”

“And who is this third person?”

“Monsieur le Prince.”

“He has come, then, as they told me?”

“Last evening.”

“And you have seen him?”

“He has just left me.”

“And will he aid this project?”

“The plan is his own.”

“And Paris?”

“He will starve it out and force it to surrender at discretion.”

“The plan is not wanting in grandeur; I see but one impediment.”

“What is it?”

“Impossibility.”

“A senseless word. Nothing is impossible.”

“On paper.”

“In execution. We have money?”

“A little,” said Mazarin, trembling, lest Anne should ask to draw upon
his purse.

“Troops?”

“Five or six thousand men.”

“Courage?”

“Plenty.”

“Then the thing is easy. Oh! do think of it, Giulio! Paris, this odious
Paris, waking up one morning without queen or king, surrounded,
besieged, famished—having for its sole resource its stupid parliament
and their coadjutor with crooked limbs!”

“Charming! charming!” said Mazarin. “I can imagine the effect, I do not
see the means.”

“I will find the means myself.”

“You are aware it will be war, civil war, furious, devouring,
implacable?”

“Oh! yes, yes, war,” said Anne of Austria. “Yes, I will reduce this
rebellious city to ashes. I will extinguish the fire with blood! I will
perpetuate the crime and punishment by making a frightful example.
Paris!; I—I detest, I loathe it!”

“Very fine, Anne. You are now sanguinary; but take care. We are not in
the time of Malatesta and Castruccio Castracani. You will get yourself
decapitated, my beautiful queen, and that would be a pity.”

“You laugh.”

“Faintly. It is dangerous to go to war with a nation. Look at your
brother monarch, Charles I. He is badly off, very badly.”

“We are in France, and I am Spanish.”

“So much the worse; I had much rather you were French and myself also;
they would hate us both less.”

“Nevertheless, you consent?”

“Yes, if the thing be possible.”

“It is; it is I who tell you so; make preparations for departure.”

“I! I am always prepared to go, only, as you know, I never do go, and
perhaps shall go this time as little as before.”

“In short, if I go, will you go too?”

“I will try.”

“You torment me, Giulio, with your fears; and what are you afraid of,
then?”

“Of many things.”

“What are they?”

Mazarin’s face, smiling as it was, became clouded.

“Anne,” said he, “you are but a woman and as a woman you may insult men
at your ease, knowing that you can do it with impunity. You accuse me
of fear; I have not so much as you have, since I do not fly as you do.
Against whom do they cry out? is it against you or against myself? Whom
would they hang, yourself or me? Well, I can weather the storm—I, whom,
notwithstanding, you tax with fear—not with bravado, that is not my
way; but I am firm. Imitate me. Make less hubbub and think more deeply.
You cry very loud, you end by doing nothing; you talk of flying——”

Mazarin shrugged his shoulders and taking the queen’s hand led her to
the window.

“Look!” he said.

“Well?” said the queen, blinded by her obstinacy.

“Well, what do you see from this window? If I am not mistaken those are
citizens, helmeted and mailed, armed with good muskets, as in the time
of the League, and whose eyes are so intently fixed on this window that
they will see you if you raise that curtain much; and now come to the
other side—what do you see? Creatures of the people, armed with
halberds, guarding your doors. You will see the same at every opening
from this palace to which I should lead you. Your doors are guarded,
the airholes of your cellars are guarded, and I could say to you, as
that good La Ramee said to me of the Duc de Beaufort, you must be
either bird or mouse to get out.”

“He did get out, nevertheless.”

“Do you think of escaping in the same way?”

“I am a prisoner, then?”

“Parbleu!” said Mazarin, “I have been proving it to you this last
hour.”

And he quietly resumed his dispatch at the place where he had been
interrupted.

Anne, trembling with anger and scarlet with humiliation, left the room,
shutting the door violently after her. Mazarin did not even turn
around. When once more in her own apartment Anne fell into a chair and
wept; then suddenly struck with an idea:

“I am saved!” she exclaimed, rising; “oh, yes! yes! I know a man who
will find the means of taking me from Paris, a man I have too long
forgotten.” Then falling into a reverie, she added, however, with an
expression of joy, “Ungrateful woman that I am, for twenty years I have
forgotten this man, whom I ought to have made a marechal of France. My
mother-in-law expended gold, caresses, dignities on Concini, who ruined
her; the king made Vitry marechal of France for an assassination: while
I have left in obscurity, in poverty, the noble D’Artagnan, who saved
me!”

And running to a table, on which were paper, pens and ink, she hastily
began to write.




Chapter L.
The Interview.


It had been D’Artagnan’s practice, ever since the riots, to sleep in
the same room as Porthos, and on this eventful morning he was still
there, sleeping, and dreaming that a yellow cloud had overspread the
sky and was raining gold pieces into his hat, which he held out till it
was overflowing with pistoles. As for Porthos, he dreamed that the
panels of his carriage were not capacious enough to contain the
armorial bearings he had ordered to be painted on them. They were both
aroused at seven o’clock by the entrance of an unliveried servant, who
brought a letter for D’Artagnan.

“From whom?” asked the Gascon.

“From the queen,” replied the servant.

“Ho!” said Porthos, raising himself in his bed; “what does she say?”

D’Artagnan requested the servant to wait in the next room and when the
door was closed he sprang up from his bed and read rapidly, whilst
Porthos looked at him with starting eyes, not daring to ask a single
question.

“Friend Porthos,” said D’Artagnan, handing the letter to him, “this
time, at least, you are sure of your title of baron, and I of my
captaincy. Read for yourself and judge.”

Porthos took the letter and with a trembling voice read the following
words:

“The queen wishes to speak to Monsieur d’Artagnan, who must follow the
bearer.”

“Well!” exclaimed Porthos; “I see nothing in that very extraordinary.”

“But I see much that is very extraordinary in it,” replied D’Artagnan.
“It is evident, by their sending for me, that matters are becoming
complicated. Just reflect a little what an agitation the queen’s mind
must be in for her to have remembered me after twenty years.”

“It is true,” said Porthos.

“Sharpen your sword, baron, load your pistols, and give some corn to
the horses, for I will answer for it, something lightning-like will
happen ere to-morrow.”

“But, stop; do you think it can be a trap that they are laying for us?”
suggested Porthos, incessantly thinking how his greatness must be
irksome to inferior people.

“If it is a snare,” replied D’Artagnan, “I shall scent it out, be
assured. If Mazarin is an Italian, I am a Gascon.”

And D’Artagnan dressed himself in an instant.

Whilst Porthos, still in bed, was hooking on his cloak for him, a
second knock at the door was heard.

“Come in,” exclaimed D’Artagnan; and another servant entered.

“From His Eminence, Cardinal Mazarin,” presenting a letter.

D’Artagnan looked at Porthos.

“A complicated affair,” said Porthos; “where will you begin?”

“It is arranged capitally; his eminence expects me in half an hour.”

“Good.”

“My friend,” said D’Artagnan, turning to the servant, “tell his
eminence that in half an hour I shall be at his command.”

“It is very fortunate,” resumed the Gascon, when the valet had retired,
“that he did not meet the other one.”

“Do you not think that they have sent for you, both for the same
thing?”

“I do not think it, I am certain of it.”

“Quick, quick, D’Artagnan. Remember that the queen awaits you, and
after the queen, the cardinal, and after the cardinal, myself.”

D’Artagnan summoned Anne of Austria’s servant and signified that he was
ready to follow him into the queen’s presence.

The servant conducted him by the Rue des Petits Champs and turning to
the left entered the little garden gate leading into the Rue Richelieu;
then they gained the private staircase and D’Artagnan was ushered into
the oratory. A certain emotion, for which he could not account, made
the lieutenant’s heart beat: he had no longer the assurance of youth;
experience had taught him the importance of past events. Formerly he
would have approached the queen as a young man who bends before a
woman; but now it was a different thing; he answered her summons as an
humble soldier obeys an illustrious general.

The silence of the oratory was at last disturbed by the slight rustling
of silk, and D’Artagnan started when he perceived the tapestry raised
by a white hand, which, by its form, its color and its beauty he
recognized as that royal hand which had one day been presented to him
to kiss. The queen entered.

“It is you, Monsieur d’Artagnan,” she said, fixing a gaze full of
melancholy interest on the countenance of the officer, “and I know you
well. Look at me well in your turn. I am the queen; do you recognize
me?”

“No, madame,” replied D’Artagnan.

“But are you no longer aware,” continued Anne, giving that sweet
expression to her voice which she could do at will, “that in former
days the queen had once need of a young, brave and devoted
cavalier—that she found this cavalier—and that, although he might have
thought that she had forgotten him, she had kept a place for him in the
depths of her heart?”

“No, madame, I was ignorant of that,” said the musketeer.

“So much the worse, sir,” said Anne of Austria; “so much the worse, at
least for the queen, for to-day she has need of the same courage and
the same devotion.”

“What!” exclaimed D’Artagnan, “does the queen, surrounded as she is by
such devoted servants, such wise counselors, men, in short, so great by
merit or position—does she deign to cast her eyes on an obscure
soldier?”

Anne understood this covert reproach and was more moved than irritated
by it. She had many a time felt humiliated by the self-sacrifice and
disinterestedness shown by the Gascon gentleman. She had allowed
herself to be exceeded in generosity.

“All that you tell me of those by whom I am surrounded, Monsieur
d’Artagnan, is doubtless true,” said the queen, “but I have confidence
in you alone. I know that you belong to the cardinal, but belong to me
as well, and I will take upon myself the making of your fortune. Come,
will you do to-day what formerly the gentleman you do not know did for
the queen?”

“I will do everything your majesty commands,” replied D’Artagnan.

The queen reflected for a moment and then, seeing the cautious demeanor
of the musketeer:

“Perhaps you like repose?” she said.

“I do not know, for I have never had it, madame.”

“Have you any friends?”

“I had three, two of whom have left Paris, to go I know not where. One
alone is left to me, but he is one of those known, I believe, to the
cavalier of whom your majesty did me the honor to speak.”

“Very good,” said the queen; “you and your friend are worth an army.”

“What am I to do, madame?”

“Return at five o’clock and I will tell you; but do not breathe to a
living soul, sir, the rendezvous which I give you.”

“No, madame.”

“Swear it upon the cross.”

“Madame, I have never been false to my word; when I say I will not do a
thing, I mean it.”

The queen, although astonished at this language, to which she was not
accustomed from her courtiers, argued from it a happy omen of the zeal
with which D’Artagnan would serve her in the accomplishment of her
project. It was one of the Gascon’s artifices to hide his deep cunning
occasionally under an appearance of rough loyalty.

“Has the queen any further commands for me now?” asked D’Artagnan.

“No, sir,” replied Anne of Austria, “and you may retire until the time
that I mentioned to you.”

D’Artagnan bowed and went out.

“Diable!” he exclaimed when the door was shut, “they seem to have the
greatest need of me just now.”

Then, as the half hour had already glided by, he crossed the gallery
and knocked at the cardinal’s door.

Bernouin introduced him.

“I come for your commands, my lord,” he said.

And according to his custom D’Artagnan glanced rapidly around and
remarked that Mazarin had a sealed letter before him. But it was so
placed on the desk that he could not see to whom it was addressed.

“You come from the queen?” said Mazarin, looking fixedly at D’Artagnan.

“I! my lord—who told you that?”

“Nobody, but I know it.”

“I regret infinitely to tell you, my lord, that you are mistaken,”
replied the Gascon, impudently, firm to the promise he had just made to
Anne of Austria.

“I opened the door of the ante-room myself and I saw you enter at the
end of the corridor.”

“Because I was shown up the private stairs.”

“How so?”

“I know not; it must have been a mistake.”

Mazarin was aware that it was not easy to make D’Artagnan reveal
anything he was desirous of hiding, so he gave up, for the time, the
discovery of the mystery the Gascon was concealing.

“Let us speak of my affairs,” said Mazarin, “since you will tell me
naught of yours. Are you fond of traveling?”

“My life has been passed on the high road.”

“Would anything retain you particularly in Paris?”

“Nothing but an order from a superior would retain me in Paris.”

“Very well. Here is a letter, which must be taken to its address.”

“To its address, my lord? But it has none.”

In fact, the side of the letter opposite the seal was blank.

“I must tell you,” resumed Mazarin, “that it is in a double envelope.”

“I understand; and I am to take off the first one when I have reached a
certain place?”

“Just so, take it and go. You have a friend, Monsieur du Vallon, whom I
like much; let him accompany you.”

“The devil!” said D’Artagnan to himself. “He knows that we overheard
his conversation yesterday and he wants to get us away from Paris.”

“Do you hesitate?” asked Mazarin.

“No, my lord, and I will set out at once. There is one thing only which
I must request.”

“What is it? Speak.”

“That your eminence will go at once to the queen.”

“What for?”

“Merely to say these words: ‘I am going to send Monsieur d’Artagnan
away and I wish him to set out directly.’”

“I told you,” said Mazarin, “that you had seen the queen.”

“I had the honor of saying to your eminence that there had been some
mistake.”

“What is the meaning of that?”

“May I venture to repeat my prayer to your eminence?”

“Very well; I will go. Wait here for me.” And looking attentively
around him, to see if he had left any of his keys in his closets,
Mazarin went out. Ten minutes elapsed, during which D’Artagnan made
every effort to read through the first envelope what was written on the
second. But he did not succeed.

Mazarin returned, pale, and evidently thoughtful. He seated himself at
his desk and D’Artagnan proceeded to examine his face, as he had just
examined the letter he held, but the envelope which covered his
countenance appeared as impenetrable as that which covered the letter.

“Ah!” thought the Gascon; “he looks displeased. Can it be with me? He
meditates. Is it about sending me to the Bastile? All very fine, my
lord, but at the very first hint you give of such a thing I will
strangle you and become Frondist. I should be carried home in triumph
like Monsieur Broussel and Athos would proclaim me the French Brutus.
It would be exceedingly droll.”

The Gascon, with his vivid imagination, had already seen the advantage
to be derived from his situation. Mazarin gave, however, no order of
the kind, but on the contrary began to be insinuating.

“You were right,” he said, “my dear Monsieur d’Artagnan, and you cannot
set out yet. I beg you to return me that dispatch.”

D’Artagnan obeyed, and Mazarin ascertained that the seal was intact.

“I shall want you this evening,” he said “Return in two hours.”

“My lord,” said D’Artagnan, “I have an appointment in two hours which I
cannot miss.”

“Do not be uneasy,” said Mazarin; “it is the same.”

“Good!” thought D’Artagnan; “I fancied it was so.”

“Return, then, at five o’clock and bring that worthy Monsieur du Vallon
with you. Only, leave him in the ante-room, as I wish to speak to you
alone.”

D’Artagnan bowed, and thought: “Both at the same hour; both commands
alike; both at the Palais Royal. Monsieur de Gondy would pay a hundred
thousand francs for such a secret!”

“You are thoughtful,” said Mazarin, uneasily.

“Yes, I was thinking whether we ought to come armed or not.”

“Armed to the teeth!” replied Mazarin.

“Very well, my lord; it shall be so.”

D’Artagnan saluted, went out and hastened to repeat to his friend
Mazarin’s flattering promises, which gave Porthos an indescribable
happiness.




Chapter LI.
The Flight.


When D’Artagnan returned to the Palais Royal at five o’clock, it
presented, in spite of the excitement which reigned in the town, a
spectacle of the greatest rejoicing. Nor was that surprising. The queen
had restored Broussel and Blancmesnil to the people and had therefore
nothing to fear, since the people had nothing more just then to ask
for. The return, also, of the conqueror of Lens was the pretext for
giving a grand banquet. The princes and princesses were invited and
their carriages had crowded the court since noon; then after dinner the
queen was to have a play in her apartment. Anne of Austria had never
appeared more brilliant than on that day—radiant with grace and wit.
Mazarin disappeared as they rose from table. He found D’Artagnan
waiting for him already at his post in the ante-room.

The cardinal advanced to him with a smile and taking him by the hand
led him into his study.

“My dear M. d’Artagnan,” said the minister, sitting down, “I am about
to give you the greatest proof of confidence that a minister can give
an officer.”

“I hope,” said D’Artagnan, bowing, “that you give it, my lord, without
hesitation and with the conviction that I am worthy of it.”

“More worthy than any one in Paris my dear friend; therefore I apply to
you. We are about to leave this evening,” continued Mazarin. “My dear
M. d’Artagnan, the welfare of the state is deposited in your hands.” He
paused.

“Explain yourself, my lord, I am listening.”

“The queen has resolved to make a little excursion with the king to
Saint Germain.”

“Aha!” said D’Artagnan, “that is to say, the queen wishes to leave
Paris.”

“A woman’s caprice—you understand.”

“Yes, I understand perfectly,” said D’Artagnan.

“It was for this she summoned you this morning and that she told you to
return at five o’clock.”

“Was it worth while to wish me to swear this morning that I would
mention the appointment to no one?” muttered D’Artagnan. “Oh, women!
women! whether queens or not, they are always the same.”

“Do you disapprove of this journey, my dear M. d’Artagnan?” asked
Mazarin, anxiously.

“I, my lord?” said D’Artagnan; “why should I?”

“Because you shrug your shoulders.”

“It is a way I have of speaking to myself. I neither approve nor
disapprove, my lord; I merely await your commands.”

“Good; it is you, accordingly, that I have pitched upon to conduct the
king and the queen to Saint Germain.”

“Liar!” thought D’Artagnan.

“You see, therefore,” continued the cardinal, perceiving D’Artagnan’s
composure, “that, as I have told you, the welfare of the state is
placed in your hands.”

“Yes, my lord, and I feel the whole responsibility of such a charge.”

“You accept, however?”

“I always accept.”

“Do you think the thing possible?”

“Everything is possible.”

“Shall you be attacked on the road?”

“Probably.”

“And what will you do in that case?”

“I shall pass through those who attack me.”

“And suppose you cannot pass through them?”

“So much the worse for them; I shall pass over them.”

“And you will place the king and queen in safety also, at Saint
Germain?”

“Yes.”

“On your life?”

“On my life.”

“You are a hero, my friend,” said Mazarin, gazing at the musketeer with
admiration.

D’Artagnan smiled.

“And I?” asked Mazarin, after a moment’s silence.

“How? and you, my lord?”

“If I wish to leave?”

“That would be much more difficult.”

“Why so?”

“Your eminence might be recognized.”

“Even under this disguise?” asked Mazarin, raising a cloak which
covered an arm-chair, upon which lay a complete dress for an officer,
of pearl-gray and red, entirely embroidered with silver.

“If your eminence is disguised it will be almost easy.”

“Ah!” said Mazarin, breathing more freely.

“But it will be necessary for your eminence to do what the other day
you declared you should have done in our place—cry, ‘Down with
Mazarin!’”

“I will: ‘Down with Mazarin’”

“In French, in good French, my lord, take care of your accent; they
killed six thousand Angevins in Sicily because they pronounced Italian
badly. Take care that the French do not take their revenge on you for
the Sicilian vespers.”

“I will do my best.”

“The streets are full of armed men,” continued D’Artagnan. “Are you
sure that no one is aware of the queen’s project?”

Mazarin reflected.

“This affair would give a fine opportunity for a traitor, my lord; the
chance of being attacked would be an excuse for everything.”

Mazarin shuddered, but he reflected that a man who had the least
intention to betray would not warn first.

“And therefore,” added he, quietly, “I have not confidence in every
one; the proof of which is, that I have fixed upon you to escort me.”

“Shall you not go with the queen?”

“No,” replied Mazarin.

“Then you will start after the queen?”

“No,” said Mazarin again.

“Ah!” said D’Artagnan, who began to understand.

“Yes,” continued the cardinal. “I have my plan. With the queen I double
her risk; after the queen her departure would double mine; then, the
court once safe, I might be forgotten. The great are often ungrateful.”

“Very true,” said D’Artagnan, fixing his eyes, in spite of himself, on
the queen’s diamond, which Mazarin wore on his finger. Mazarin followed
the direction of his eyes and gently turned the hoop of the ring
inside.

“I wish,” he said, with his cunning smile, “to prevent them from being
ungrateful to me.”

“It is but Christian charity,” replied D’Artagnan, “not to lead one’s
neighbors into temptation.”

“It is exactly for that reason,” said Mazarin, “that I wish to start
before them.”

D’Artagnan smiled—he was just the man to understand the astute Italian.
Mazarin saw the smile and profited by the moment.

“You will begin, therefore, by taking me first out of Paris, will you
not, my dear M. d’Artagnan?”

“A difficult commission, my lord,” replied D’Artagnan, resuming his
serious manner.

“But,” said Mazarin, “you did not make so many difficulties with regard
to the king and queen.”

“The king and the queen are my king and queen,” replied the musketeer,
“my life is theirs and I must give it for them. If they ask it what
have I to say?”

“That is true,” murmured Mazarin, in a low tone, “but as thy life is
not mine I suppose I must buy it, must I not?” and sighing deeply he
began to turn the hoop of his ring outside again. D’Artagnan smiled.
These two men met at one point and that was, cunning; had they been
actuated equally by courage, the one would have done great things for
the other.

“But, also,” said Mazarin, “you must understand that if I ask this
service from you it is with the intention of being grateful.”

“Is it still only an intention, your eminence?” asked D’Artagnan.

“Stay,” said Mazarin, drawing the ring from his finger, “my dear
D’Artagnan, there is a diamond which belonged to you formerly, it is
but just it should return to you; take it, I pray.”

D’Artagnan spared Mazarin the trouble of insisting, and after looking
to see if the stone was the same and assuring himself of the purity of
its water, he took it and passed it on his finger with indescribable
pleasure.

“I valued it much,” said Mazarin, giving a last look at it;
“nevertheless, I give it to you with great pleasure.”

“And I, my lord,” said D’Artagnan, “accept it as it is given. Come, let
us speak of your little affairs. You wish to leave before everybody and
at what hour?”

“At ten o’clock.”

“And the queen, at what time is it her wish to start?”

“At midnight.”

“Then it is possible. I can get you out of Paris and leave you beyond
the barriere, and can return for her.”

“Capital; but how will you get me out of Paris?”

“Oh! as to that, you must leave it to me.”

“I give you absolute power, therefore; take as large an escort as you
like.”

D’Artagnan shook his head.

“It seems to me, however,” said Mazarin, “the safest method.”

“Yes, for you, my lord, but not for the queen; you must leave it to me
and give me the entire direction of the undertaking.”

“Nevertheless——”

“Or find some one else,” continued D’Artagnan, turning his back.

“Oh!” muttered Mazarin, “I do believe he is going off with the diamond!
M. d’Artagnan, my dear M. d’Artagnan,” he called out in a coaxing
voice, “will you answer for everything?”

“I will answer for nothing. I will do my best.”

“Well, then, let us go—I must trust to you.”

“It is very fortunate,” said D’Artagnan to himself.

“You will be here at half-past nine.”

“And I shall find your eminence ready?”

“Certainly, quite ready.”

“Well, then, it is a settled thing; and now, my lord, will you obtain
for me an audience with the queen?”

“For what purpose?”

“I wish to receive her majesty’s commands from her own lips.”

“She desired me to give them to you.”

“She may have forgotten something.”

“You really wish to see her?”

“It is indispensable, my lord.”

Mazarin hesitated for one instant, but D’Artagnan was firm.

“Come, then,” said the minister; “I will conduct you to her, but
remember, not one word of our conversation.”

“What has passed between us concerns ourselves alone, my lord,” replied
D’Artagnan.

“Swear to be mute.”

“I never swear, my lord, I say yes or no; and, as I am a gentleman, I
keep my word.”

“Come, then, I see that I must trust unreservedly to you.”

“Believe me, my lord, it will be your best plan.”

“Come,” said Mazarin, conducting D’Artagnan into the queen’s oratory
and desiring him to wait there. He did not wait long, for in five
minutes the queen entered in full gala costume. Thus dressed she
scarcely appeared thirty-five years of age. She was still exceedingly
handsome.

“It is you, Monsieur D’Artagnan,” she said, smiling graciously; “I
thank you for having insisted on seeing me.”

“I ought to ask your majesty’s pardon, but I wished to receive your
commands from your own mouth.”

“Do you accept the commission which I have intrusted to you?”

“With gratitude.”

“Very well, be here at midnight.”

“I will not fail.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” continued the queen, “I know your
disinterestedness too well to speak of my own gratitude at such a
moment, but I swear to you that I shall not forget this second service
as I forgot the first.”

“Your majesty is free to forget or to remember, as it pleases you; and
I know not what you mean,” said D’Artagnan, bowing.

“Go, sir,” said the queen, with her most bewitching smile, “go and
return at midnight.”

And D’Artagnan retired, but as he passed out he glanced at the curtain
through which the queen had entered and at the bottom of the tapestry
he remarked the tip of a velvet slipper.

“Good,” thought he; “Mazarin has been listening to discover whether I
betrayed him. In truth, that Italian puppet does not deserve the
services of an honest man.”

D’Artagnan was not less exact to his appointment and at half-past nine
o’clock he entered the ante-room.

He found the cardinal dressed as an officer, and he looked very well in
that costume, which, as we have already said, he wore elegantly; only
he was very pale and trembled slightly.

“Quite alone?” he asked.

“Yes, my lord.”

“And that worthy Monsieur du Vallon, are we not to enjoy his society?”

“Certainly, my lord; he is waiting in his carriage at the gate of the
garden of the Palais Royal.”

“And we start in his carriage, then?”

“Yes, my lord.”

“And with us no other escort but you two?”

“Is it not enough? One of us would suffice.”

“Really, my dear Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said the cardinal, “your
coolness startles me.”

“I should have thought, on the contrary, that it ought to have inspired
you with confidence.”

“And Bernouin—do I not take him with me?”

“There is no room for him, he will rejoin your eminence.”

“Let us go,” said Mazarin, “since everything must be done as you wish.”

“My lord, there is time to draw back,” said D’Artagnan, “and your
eminence is perfectly free.”

“Not at all, not at all,” said Mazarin; “let us be off.”

And so they descended the private stair, Mazarin leaning on the arm of
D’Artagnan a hand the musketeer felt trembling. At last, after crossing
the courts of the Palais Royal, where there still remained some of the
conveyances of late guests, they entered the garden and reached the
little gate. Mazarin attempted to open it by a key which he took from
his pocket, but with such shaking fingers that he could not find the
keyhole.

“Give it to me,” said D’Artagnan, who when the gate was open deposited
the key in his pocket, reckoning upon returning by that gate.

The steps were already down and the door open. Mousqueton stood at the
door and Porthos was inside the carriage.

“Mount, my lord,” said D’Artagnan to Mazarin, who sprang into the
carriage without waiting for a second bidding. D’Artagnan followed him,
and Mousqueton, having closed the door, mounted behind the carriage
with many groans. He had made some difficulties about going, under
pretext that he still suffered from his wound, but D’Artagnan had said
to him:

“Remain if you like, my dear Monsieur Mouston, but I warn you that
Paris will be burnt down to-night;” upon which Mousqueton had declared,
without asking anything further, that he was ready to follow his master
and Monsieur d’Artagnan to the end of the world.

The carriage started at a measured pace, without betraying by the
slightest sign that it contained people in a hurry. The cardinal wiped
his forehead with his handkerchief and looked around him. On his left
was Porthos, whilst D’Artagnan was on his right; each guarded a door
and served as a rampart to him on either side. Before him, on the front
seat, lay two pairs of pistols—one in front of Porthos and the other of
D’Artagnan. About a hundred paces from the Palais Royal a patrol
stopped the carriage.

“Who goes?” asked the captain.

“Mazarin!” replied D’Artagnan, bursting into a laugh. The cardinal’s
hair stood on end. But the joke appeared an excellent one to the
citizens, who, seeing the conveyance without escort and unarmed, would
never have believed in the possibility of so great an imprudence.

“A good journey to ye,” they cried, allowing it to pass.

“Hem!” said D’Artagnan, “what does my lord think of that reply?”

“Man of talent!” cried Mazarin.

“In truth,” said Porthos, “I understand; but now——”

About the middle of the Rue des Petits Champs they were stopped by a
second patrol.

“Who goes there?” inquired the captain of the patrol.

“Keep back, my lord,” said D’Artagnan. And Mazarin buried himself so
far behind the two friends that he disappeared, completely hidden
between them.

“Who goes there?” cried the same voice, impatiently whilst D’Artagnan
perceived that they had rushed to the horses’ heads. But putting his
head out of the carriage:

“Eh! Planchet,” said he.

The chief approached, and it was indeed Planchet; D’Artagnan had
recognized the voice of his old servant.

“How, sir!” said Planchet, “is it you?”

“Eh! mon Dieu! yes, my good friend, this worthy Porthos has just
received a sword wound and I am taking him to his country house at
Saint Cloud.”

“Oh! really,” said Planchet.

“Porthos,” said D’Artagnan, “if you can still speak, say a word, my
dear Porthos, to this good Planchet.”

“Planchet, my friend,” said Porthos, in a melancholy voice, “I am very
ill; should you meet a doctor you will do me a favor by sending him to
me.”

“Oh! good Heaven,” said Planchet, “what a misfortune! and how did it
happen?”

“I will tell you all about it,” replied Mousqueton.

Porthos uttered a deep groan.

“Make way for us, Planchet,” said D’Artagnan in a whisper to him, “or
he will not arrive alive; the lungs are attacked, my friend.”

Planchet shook his head with the air of a man who says, “In that case
things look ill.” Then he exclaimed, turning to his men:

“Let them pass; they are friends.”

The carriage resumed its course, and Mazarin, who had held his breath,
ventured to breathe again.

“Bricconi!” muttered he.

A few steps in advance of the gate of Saint Honore they met a third
troop; this latter party was composed of ill-looking fellows, who
resembled bandits more than anything else; they were the men of the
beggar of Saint Eustache.

“Attention, Porthos!” cried D’Artagnan.

Porthos placed his hand on the pistols.

“What is it?” asked Mazarin.

“My lord, I think we are in bad company.”

A man advanced to the door with a kind of scythe in his hand. “Qui
vive?” he asked.

“Eh, rascal!” said D’Artagnan, “do you not recognize his highness the
prince’s carriage?”

“Prince or not,” said the man, “open. We are here to guard the gate,
and no one whom we do not know shall pass.”

“What is to be done?” said Porthos.

“Pardieu! pass,” replied D’Artagnan.

“But how?” asked Mazarin.

“Through or over; coachman, gallop on.”

The coachman raised his whip.

“Not a step further,” said the man, who appeared to be the captain, “or
I will hamstring your horses.”

“Peste!” said Porthos, “it would be a pity; animals which cost me a
hundred pistoles each.”

“I will pay you two hundred for them,” said Mazarin.

“Yes, but when once they are hamstrung, our necks will be strung next.”

“If one of them comes to my side,” asked Porthos, “must I kill him?”

“Yes, by a blow of your fist, if you can; we will not fire but at the
last extremity.”

“I can do it,” said Porthos.

“Come and open, then!” cried D’Artagnan to the man with the scythe,
taking one of the pistols up by the muzzle and preparing to strike with
the handle. And as the man approached, D’Artagnan, in order to have
more freedom for his actions, leaned half out of the door; his eyes
were fixed upon those of the mendicant, which were lighted up by a
lantern. Without doubt he recognized D’Artagnan, for he became deadly
pale; doubtless the musketeer knew him, for his hair stood up on his
head.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan!” he cried, falling back a step; “it is Monsieur
d’Artagnan! let him pass.”

D’Artagnan was perhaps about to reply, when a blow, similar to that of
a mallet falling on the head of an ox, was heard. The noise was caused
by Porthos, who had just knocked down his man.

D’Artagnan turned around and saw the unfortunate man upon his back
about four paces off.

“‘Sdeath!” cried he to the coachman. “Spur your horses! whip! get on!”

The coachman bestowed a heavy blow of the whip upon his horses; the
noble animals bounded forward; then cries of men who were knocked down
were heard; then a double concussion was felt, and two of the wheels
seemed to pass over a round and flexible body. There was a moment’s
silence, then the carriage cleared the gate.

“To Cours la Reine!” cried D’Artagnan to the coachman; then turning to
Mazarin he said, “Now, my lord, you can say five paters and five aves,
in thanks to Heaven for your deliverance. You are safe—you are free.”

Mazarin replied only by a groan; he could not believe in such a
miracle. Five minutes later the carriage stopped, having reached Cours
la Reine.

“Is my lord pleased with his escort?” asked D’Artagnan.

“Enchanted, monsieur,” said Mazarin, venturing his head out of one of
the windows; “and now do as much for the queen.”

“It will not be so difficult,” replied D’Artagnan, springing to the
ground. “Monsieur du Vallon, I commend his eminence to your care.”

“Be quite at ease,” said Porthos, holding out his hand, which
D’Artagnan took and shook in his.

“Oh!” cried Porthos, as if in pain.

D’Artagnan looked with surprise at his friend.

“What is the matter, then?” he asked.

“I think I have sprained my wrist,’ said Porthos.

“The devil! why, you strike like a blind or a deaf man.”

“It was necessary; my man was going to fire a pistol at me; but you—how
did you get rid of yours?”

“Oh, mine,” replied D’Artagnan, “was not a man.”

“What was it then?”

“It was an apparition.”

“And——”

“I charmed it away.”

Without further explanation D’Artagnan took the pistols which were upon
the front seat, placed them in his belt, wrapped himself in his cloak,
and not wishing to enter by the same gate as that through which they
had left, he took his way toward the Richelieu gate.




Chapter LII.
The Carriage of Monsieur le Coadjuteur.


Instead of returning, then, by the Saint Honore gate, D’Artagnan, who
had time before him, walked around and re-entered by the Porte
Richelieu. He was approached to be examined, and when it was discovered
by his plumed hat and his laced coat, that he was an officer of the
musketeers, he was surrounded, with the intention of making him cry,
“Down with Mazarin!” The demonstration did not fail to make him uneasy
at first; but when he discovered what it meant, he shouted it in such a
voice that even the most exacting were satisfied. He walked down the
Rue Richelieu, meditating how he should carry off the queen in her
turn, for to take her in a carriage bearing the arms of France was not
to be thought of, when he perceived an equipage standing at the door of
the hotel belonging to Madame de Guemenee.

He was struck by a sudden idea.

“Ah, pardieu!” he exclaimed; “that would be fair play.”

And approaching the carriage, he examined the arms on the panels and
the livery of the coachman on his box. This scrutiny was so much the
more easy, the coachman being sound asleep.

“It is, in truth, monsieur le coadjuteur’s carriage,” said D’Artagnan;
“upon my honor I begin to think that Heaven favors us.”

He mounted noiselessly into the chariot and pulled the silk cord which
was attached to the coachman’s little finger.

“To the Palais Royal,” he called out.

The coachman awoke with a start and drove off in the direction he was
desired, never doubting but that the order had come from his master.
The porter at the palace was about to close the gates, but seeing such
a handsome equipage he fancied that it was some visit of importance and
the carriage was allowed to pass and to stop beneath the porch. It was
then only the coachman perceived the grooms were not behind the
vehicle; he fancied monsieur le coadjuteur had sent them back, and
without dropping the reins he sprang from his box to open the door.
D’Artagnan, in his turn, sprang to the ground, and just at the moment
when the coachman, alarmed at not seeing his master, fell back a step,
he seized him by his collar with the left, whilst with the right hand
he placed the muzzle of a pistol at his breast.

“Pronounce one single word,” muttered D’Artagnan, “and you are a dead
man.”

The coachman perceived at once, by the expression of the man who thus
addressed him, that he had fallen into a trap, and he remained with his
mouth wide open and his eyes portentously staring.

Two musketeers were pacing the court, to whom D’Artagnan called by
their names.

“Monsieur de Belliere,” said he to one of them, “do me the favor to
take the reins from the hands of this worthy man, mount upon the box
and drive to the door of the private stair, and wait for me there; it
is an affair of importance on the service of the king.”

The musketeer, who knew that his lieutenant was incapable of jesting
with regard to the service, obeyed without a word, although he thought
the order strange. Then turning toward the second musketeer, D’Artagnan
said:

“Monsieur du Verger, help me to place this man in a place of safety.”

The musketeer, thinking that his lieutenant had just arrested some
prince in disguise, bowed, and drawing his sword, signified that he was
ready. D’Artagnan mounted the staircase, followed by his prisoner, who
in his turn was followed by the soldier, and entered Mazarin’s
ante-room. Bernouin was waiting there, impatient for news of his
master.

“Well, sir?” he said.

“Everything goes on capitally, my dear Monsieur Bernouin, but here is a
man whom I must beg you to put in a safe place.”

“Where, then, sir?”

“Where you like, provided that the place which you shall choose has
iron shutters secured by padlocks and a door that can be locked.”

“We have that, sir,” replied Bernouin; and the poor coachman was
conducted to a closet, the windows of which were barred and which
looked very much like a prison.

“And now, my good friend,” said D’Artagnan to him, “I must invite you
to deprive yourself, for my sake, of your hat and cloak.”

The coachman, as we can well understand, made no resistance; in fact,
he was so astonished at what had happened to him that he stammered and
reeled like a drunken man; D’Artagnan deposited his clothes under the
arm of one of the valets.

“And now, Monsieur du Verger,” he said, “shut yourself up with this man
until Monsieur Bernouin returns to open the door. The duty will be
tolerably long and not very amusing, I know; but,” added he, seriously,
“you understand, it is on the king’s service.”

“At your command, lieutenant,” replied the musketeer, who saw the
business was a serious one.

“By-the-bye,” continued D’Artagnan, “should this man attempt to fly or
to call out, pass your sword through his body.”

The musketeer signified by a nod that these commands should be obeyed
to the letter, and D’Artagnan went out, followed by Bernouin. Midnight
struck.

“Lead me into the queen’s oratory,” said D’Artagnan, “announce to her I
am here, and put this parcel, with a well-loaded musket, under the seat
of the carriage which is waiting at the foot of the private stair.”

Bernouin conducted D’Artagnan to the oratory, where he sat down
pensively. Everything had gone on as usual at the Palais Royal. As we
said before, by ten o’clock almost all the guests had dispersed; those
who were to fly with the court had the word of command and they were
each severally desired to be from twelve o’clock to one at Cours la
Reine.

At ten o’clock Anne of Austria had entered the king’s room. Monsieur
had just retired, and the youthful Louis, remaining the last, was
amusing himself by placing some lead soldiers in a line of battle, a
game which delighted him much. Two royal pages were playing with him.

“Laporte,” said the queen, “it is time for his majesty to go to bed.”

The king asked to remain up, having, he said, no wish to sleep; but the
queen was firm.

“Are you not going to-morrow morning at six o’clock, Louis, to bathe at
Conflans? I think you wished to do so of your own accord?”

“You are right, madame,” said the king, “and I am ready to retire to my
room when you have kissed me. Laporte, give the light to Monsieur the
Chevalier de Coislin.”

The queen touched with her lips the white, smooth brow the royal child
presented to her with a gravity which already partook of etiquette.

“Go to sleep soon, Louis,” said the queen, “for you must be awakened
very early.”

“I will do my best to obey you, madame,” said the youthful king, “but I
have no inclination to sleep.”

“Laporte,” said Anne of Austria, in an undertone, “find some very dull
book to read to his majesty, but do not undress yourself.”

The king went out, accompanied by the Chevalier de Coislin, bearing the
candlestick, and then the queen returned to her own apartment. Her
ladies—that is to say Madame de Bregy, Mademoiselle de Beaumont, Madame
de Motteville, and Socratine, her sister, so called on account of her
sense—had just brought into her dressing-room the remains of the
dinner, on which, according to her usual custom, she supped. The queen
then gave her orders, spoke of a banquet which the Marquis de
Villequier was to give to her on the day after the morrow, indicated
the persons she would admit to the honor of partaking of it, announced
another visit on the following day to Val-de-Grace, where she intended
to pay her devotions, and gave her commands to her senior valet to
accompany her. When the ladies had finished their supper the queen
feigned extreme fatigue and passed into her bedroom. Madame de
Motteville, who was on especial duty that evening, followed to aid and
undress her. The queen then began to read, and after conversing with
her affectionately for a few minutes, dismissed her.

It was at this moment D’Artagnan entered the courtyard of the palace,
in the coadjutor’s carriage, and a few seconds later the carriages of
the ladies-in-waiting drove out and the gates were shut after them.

A few minutes after twelve o’clock Bernouin knocked at the queen’s
bedroom door, having come by the cardinal’s secret corridor. Anne of
Austria opened the door to him herself. She was dressed, that is to
say, in dishabille, wrapped in a long, warm dressing-gown.

“It is you, Bernouin,” she said. “Is Monsieur d’Artagnan there?”

“Yes, madame, in your oratory. He is waiting till your majesty is
ready.”

“I am. Go and tell Laporte to wake and dress the king, and then pass on
to the Marechal de Villeroy and summon him to me.”

Bernouin bowed and retired.

The queen entered her oratory, which was lighted by a single lamp of
Venetian crystal, She saw D’Artagnan, who stood expecting her.

“Is it you?” she said.

“Yes, madame.”

“Are you ready?”

“I am.”

“And his eminence, the cardinal?”

“Has got off without any accident. He is awaiting your majesty at Cours
la Reine.”

“But in what carriage do we start?”

“I have provided for everything; a carriage below is waiting for your
majesty.”

“Let us go to the king.”

D’Artagnan bowed and followed the queen. The young Louis was already
dressed, with the exception of his shoes and doublet; he had allowed
himself to be dressed, in great astonishment, overwhelming Laporte with
questions, who replied only in these words, “Sire, it is by the queen’s
commands.”

The bedclothes were thrown back, exposing the king’s bed linen, which
was so worn that here and there holes could be seen. It was one of the
results of Mazarin’s niggardliness.

The queen entered and D’Artagnan remained at the door. As soon as the
child perceived the queen he escaped from Laporte and ran to meet her.
Anne then motioned to D’Artagnan to approach, and he obeyed.

“My son,” said Anne of Austria, pointing to the musketeer, calm,
standing uncovered, “here is Monsieur d’Artagnan, who is as brave as
one of those ancient heroes of whom you like so much to hear from my
women. Remember his name well and look at him well, that his face may
not be forgotten, for this evening he is going to render us a great
service.”

The young king looked at the officer with his large-formed eye, and
repeated:

“Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“That is it, my son.”

The young king slowly raised his little hand and held it out to the
musketeer; the latter bent on his knee and kissed it.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” repeated Louis; “very well, madame.”

At this moment they were startled by a noise as if a tumult were
approaching.

“What is that?” exclaimed the queen.

“Oh, oh!” replied D’Artagnan, straining both at the same time his quick
ear and his intelligent glance, “it is the murmur of the populace in
revolution.”

“We must fly,” said the queen.

“Your majesty has given me the control of this business; we had better
wait and see what they want.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan!”

“I will answer for everything.”

Nothing is so catching as confidence. The queen, full of energy and
courage, was quickly alive to these two virtues in others.

“Do as you like,” she said, “I rely upon you.”

“Will your majesty permit me to give orders in your name throughout
this business?”

“Command, sir.”

“What do the people want this time?” demanded the king.

“We are about to ascertain, sire,” replied D’Artagnan, as he rapidly
left the room.

The tumult continued to increase and seemed to surround the Palais
Royal entirely. Cries were heard from the interior, of which they could
not comprehend the sense. It was evident that there was clamor and
sedition.

The king, half dressed, the queen and Laporte remained each in the same
state and almost in the same place, where they were listening and
waiting. Comminges, who was on guard that night at the Palais Royal,
ran in. He had about two hundred men in the courtyards and stables, and
he placed them at the queen’s disposal.

“Well,” asked Anne of Austria, when D’Artagnan reappeared, “what does
it mean?”

“It means, madame, that the report has spread that the queen has left
the Palais Royal, carrying off the king, and the people ask to have
proof to the contrary, or threaten to demolish the Palais Royal.”

“Oh, this time it is too much!” exclaimed the queen, “and I will prove
to them I have not left.”

D’Artagnan saw from the expression of the queen’s face that she was
about to issue some violent command. He approached her and said in a
low voice:

“Has your majesty still confidence in me?”

This voice startled her. “Yes, sir,” she replied, “every confidence;
speak.”

“Will the queen deign to follow my advice?”

“Speak.”

“Let your majesty dismiss M. de Comminges and desire him to shut
himself up with his men in the guardhouse and in the stables.”

Comminges glanced at D’Artagnan with the envious look with which every
courtier sees a new favorite spring up.

“You hear, Comminges?” said the queen.

D’Artagnan went up to him; with his usual quickness he caught the
anxious glance.

“Monsieur de Comminges,” he said, “pardon me; we both are servants of
the queen, are we not? It is my turn to be of use to her; do not envy
me this happiness.”

Comminges bowed and left.

“Come,” said D’Artagnan to himself, “I have got one more enemy.”

“And now,” said the queen, addressing D’Artagnan, “what is to be done?
for you hear that, instead of becoming calmer, the noise increases.”

“Madame,” said D’Artagnan, “the people want to see the king and they
must see him.”

“What! must see him! Where—on the balcony?”

“Not at all, madame, but here, sleeping in his bed.”

“Oh, your majesty,” exclaimed Laporte, “Monsieur d’Artagnan is right.”

The queen became thoughtful and smiled, like a woman to whom duplicity
is no stranger.

“Without doubt,” she murmured.

“Monsieur Laporte,” said D’Artagnan, “go and announce to the people
through the grating that they are going to be satisfied and that in
five minutes they shall not only see the king, but they shall see him
in bed; add that the king sleeps and that the queen begs that they will
keep silence, so as not to awaken him.”

“But not every one; a deputation of two or four people.”

“Every one, madame.”

“But reflect, they will keep us here till daybreak.”

“It shall take but a quarter of an hour, I answer for everything,
madame; believe me, I know the people; they are like a great child, who
only wants humoring. Before the sleeping king they will be mute, gentle
and timid as lambs.”

“Go, Laporte,” said the queen.

The young king approached his mother and said, “Why do as these people
ask?”

“It must be so, my son,” said Anne of Austria.

“But if they say, ‘it must be’ to me, am I no longer king?”

The queen remained silent.

“Sire,” said D’Artagnan, “will your majesty permit me to ask you a
question?”

Louis XIV. turned around, astonished that any one should dare to
address him. But the queen pressed the child’s hand.

“Yes, sir.” he said.

“Does your majesty remember, when playing in the park of Fontainebleau,
or in the palace courts at Versailles, ever to have seen the sky grow
suddenly dark and heard the sound of thunder?”

“Yes, certainly.”

“Well, then, this noise of thunder, however much your majesty may have
wished to continue playing, has said, ‘go in, sire. You must do so.’”

“Certainly, sir; but they tell me that the noise of thunder is the
voice of God.”

“Well then, sire,” continued D’Artagnan, “listen to the noise of the
people; you will perceive that it resembles that of thunder.”

In truth at that moment a terrible murmur was wafted to them by the
night breeze; then all at once it ceased.

“Hold, sire,” said D’Artagnan, “they have just told the people that you
are asleep; you see, you still are king.”

The queen looked with surprise at this strange man, whose brilliant
courage made him the equal of the bravest, and who was, by his fine and
quick intelligence, the equal of the most astute.

Laporte entered.

“Well, Laporte?” asked the queen.

“Madame,” he replied, “Monsieur d’Artagnan’s prediction has been
accomplished; they are calm, as if by enchantment. The doors are about
to be opened and in five minutes they will be here.”

“Laporte,” said the queen, “suppose you put one of your sons in the
king’s place; we might be off during the time.”

“If your majesty desires it,” said Laporte, “my sons, like myself, are
at the queen’s service.”

“Not at all,” said D’Artagnan; “should one of them know his majesty and
discover but a substitute, all would be lost.”

“You are right, sir, always right,” said Anne of Austria. “Laporte,
place the king in bed.”

Laporte placed the king, dressed as he was, in the bed and then covered
him as far as the shoulders with the sheet. The queen bent over him and
kissed his brow.

“Pretend to sleep, Louis,” said she.

“Yes,” said the king, “but I do not wish to be touched by any of those
men.”

“Sire, I am here,” said D’Artagnan, “and I give you my word, that if a
single man has the audacity, his life shall pay for it.”

“And now what is to be done?” asked the queen, “for I hear them.”

“Monsieur Laporte, go to them and again recommend silence. Madame, wait
at the door, whilst I shall be at the head of the king’s bed, ready to
die for him.”

Laporte went out; the queen remained standing near the hangings, whilst
D’Artagnan glided behind the curtains.

Then the heavy and collected steps of a multitude of men were heard,
and the queen herself raised the tapestry hangings and put her finger
on her lips.

On seeing the queen, the men stopped short, respectfully.

“Enter, gentlemen, enter,” said the queen.

There was then amongst that crowd a moment’s hesitation, which looked
like shame. They had expected resistance, they had expected to be
thwarted, to have to force the gates, to overturn the guards. The gates
had opened of themselves, and the king, ostensibly at least, had no
other guard at his bed-head but his mother. The foremost of them
stammered and attempted to fall back.

“Enter, gentlemen,” said Laporte, “since the queen desires you so to
do.”

Then one more bold than the rest ventured to pass the door and to
advance on tiptoe. This example was imitated by the rest, until the
room filled silently, as if these men had been the humblest, most
devoted courtiers. Far beyond the door the heads of those who were not
able to enter could be seen, all craning to their utmost height to try
and see.

D’Artagnan saw it all through an opening he had made in the curtain,
and in the very first man who entered he recognized Planchet.

“Sir,” said the queen to him, thinking he was the leader of the band,
“you wished to see the king and therefore I determined to show him to
you myself. Approach and look at him and say if we have the appearance
of people who wish to run away.”

“No, certainly,” replied Planchet, rather astonished at the unexpected
honor conferred upon him.

“You will say, then, to my good and faithful Parisians,” continued
Anne, with a smile, the expression of which did not deceive D’Artagnan,
“that you have seen the king in bed, asleep, and the queen also ready
to retire.”

“I shall tell them, madame, and those who accompany me will say the
same thing; but——”

“But what?” asked Anne of Austria.

“Will your majesty pardon me,” said Planchet, “but is it really the
king who is lying there?”

Anne of Austria started. “If,” she said, “there is one among you who
knows the king, let him approach and say whether it is really his
majesty lying there.”

A man wrapped in a cloak, in the folds of which his face was hidden,
approached and leaned over the bed and looked.

For one second, D’Artagnan thought the man had some evil design and he
put his hand to his sword; but in the movement made by the man in
stooping a portion of his face was uncovered and D’Artagnan recognized
the coadjutor.

“It is certainly the king,” said the man, rising again. “God bless his
majesty!”

“Yes,” repeated the leader in a whisper, “God bless his majesty!” and
all these men, who had entered enraged, passed from anger to pity and
blessed the royal infant in their turn.

“Now,” said Planchet, “let us thank the queen. My friends, retire.”

They all bowed, and retired by degrees as noiselessly as they had
entered. Planchet, who had been the first to enter, was the last to
leave. The queen stopped him.

“What is your name, my friend?” she said.

Planchet, much surprised at the inquiry, turned back.

“Yes,” continued the queen, “I think myself as much honored to have
received you this evening as if you had been a prince, and I wish to
know your name.”

“Yes,” thought Planchet, “to treat me as a prince. No, thank you.”

D’Artagnan trembled lest Planchet, seduced, like the crow in the fable,
should tell his name, and that the queen, knowing his name, would
discover that Planchet had belonged to him.

“Madame,” replied Planchet, respectfully, “I am called Dulaurier, at
your service.”

“Thank you, Monsieur Dulaurier,” said the queen; “and what is your
business?”

“Madame, I am a clothier in the Rue Bourdonnais.”

“That is all I wished to know,” said the queen. “Much obliged to you,
Monsieur Dulaurier. You will hear again from me.”

“Come, come,” thought D’Artagnan, emerging from behind the curtain,
“decidedly Monsieur Planchet is no fool; it is evident he has been
brought up in a good school.”

The different actors in this strange scene remained facing one another,
without uttering a single word; the queen standing near the door,
D’Artagnan half out of his hiding place, the king raised on his elbow,
ready to fall down on his bed again at the slightest sound that would
indicate the return of the multitude, but instead of approaching, the
noise became more and more distant and very soon it died entirely away.

The queen breathed more freely. D’Artagnan wiped his damp forehead and
the king slid off his bed, saying, “Let us go.”

At this moment Laporte reappeared.

“Well?” asked the queen

“Well, madame,” replied the valet, “I followed them as far as the
gates. They announced to all their comrades that they had seen the king
and that the queen had spoken to them; and, in fact, they went away
quite proud and happy.”

“Oh, the miserable wretches!” murmured the queen, “they shall pay
dearly for their boldness, and it is I who promise this.”

Then turning to D’Artagnan, she said:

“Sir, you have given me this evening the best advice I have ever
received. Continue, and say what we must do now.”

“Monsieur Laporte,” said D’Artagnan, “finish dressing his majesty.”

“We may go, then?” asked the queen.

“Whenever your majesty pleases. You have only to descend by the private
stairs and you will find me at the door.”

“Go, sir,” said the queen; “I will follow you.”

D’Artagnan went down and found the carriage at its post and the
musketeer on the box. D’Artagnan took out the parcel which he had
desired Bernouin to place under the seat. It may be remembered that it
was the hat and cloak belonging to Monsieur de Gondy’s coachman.

He placed the cloak on his shoulders and the hat on his head, whilst
the musketeer got off the box.

“Sir,” said D’Artagnan, “you will go and release your companion, who is
guarding the coachman. You must mount your horse and proceed to the Rue
Tiquetonne, Hotel de la Chevrette, whence you will take my horse and
that of Monsieur du Vallon, which you must saddle and equip as if for
war, and then you will leave Paris, bringing them with you to Cours la
Reine. If, when you arrive at Cours la Reine, you find no one, you must
go on to Saint Germain. On the king’s service.”

The musketeer touched his cap and went away to execute the orders thus
received.

D’Artagnan mounted the box, having a pair of pistols in his belt, a
musket under his feet and a naked sword behind him.

The queen appeared, and was followed by the king and the Duke d’Anjou,
his brother.

“Monsieur the coadjutor’s carriage!” she exclaimed, falling back.

“Yes, madame,” said D’Artagnan; “but get in fearlessly, for I myself
will drive you.”

The queen uttered a cry of surprise and entered the carriage, and the
king and monsieur took their places at her side.

“Come, Laporte,” said the queen.

“How, madame!” said the valet, “in the same carriage as your
majesties?”

“It is not a matter of royal etiquette this evening, but of the king’s
safety. Get in, Laporte.”

Laporte obeyed.

“Pull down the blinds,” said D’Artagnan.

“But will that not excite suspicion, sir?” asked the queen.

“Your majesty’s mind may be quite at ease,” replied the officer; “I
have my answer ready.”

The blinds were pulled down and they started at a gallop by the Rue
Richelieu. On reaching the gate the captain of the post advanced at the
head of a dozen men, holding a lantern in his hand.

D’Artagnan signed to them to draw near.

“Do you recognize the carriage?” he asked the sergeant.

“No,” replied the latter.

“Look at the arms.”

The sergeant put the lantern near the panel.

“They are those of monsieur le coadjuteur,” he said.

“Hush; he is enjoying a ride with Madame de Guemenee.”

The sergeant began to laugh.

“Open the gate,” he cried. “I know who it is!” Then putting his face to
the lowered blinds, he said:

“I wish you joy, my lord!”

“Impudent fellow!” cried D’Artagnan, “you will get me turned off.”

The gate groaned on its hinges, and D’Artagnan, seeing the way clear,
whipped his horses, who started at a canter, and five minutes later
they had rejoined the cardinal.

“Mousqueton!” exclaimed D’Artagnan, “draw up the blinds of his
majesty’s carriage.”

“It is he!” cried Porthos.

“Disguised as a coachman!” exclaimed Mazarin.

“And driving the coadjutor’s carriage!” said the queen.

“Corpo di Dio! Monsieur d’Artagnan!” said Mazarin, “you are worth your
weight in gold.”




Chapter LIII.
How D’Artagnan and Porthos earned by selling Straw.


Mazarin was desirous of setting out instantly for Saint Germain, but
the queen declared that she should wait for the people whom she had
appointed to meet her. However, she offered the cardinal Laporte’s
place, which he accepted and went from one carriage to the other.

It was not without foundation that a report of the king’s intention to
leave Paris by night had been circulated. Ten or twelve persons had
been in the secret since six o’clock, and howsoever great their
prudence might be, they could not issue the necessary orders for the
departure without suspicion being generated. Besides, each individual
had one or two others for whom he was interested; and as there could be
no doubt but that the queen was leaving Paris full of terrible projects
of vengeance, every one had warned parents and friends of what was
about to transpire; so that the news of the approaching exit ran like a
train of lighted gunpowder along the streets.

The first carriage which arrived after that of the queen was that of
the Prince de Condé, with the princess and dowager princess. Both these
ladies had been awakened in the middle of the night and did not know
what it all was about. The second contained the Duke and Duchess of
Orleans, the tall young Mademoiselle and the Abbé de la Riviere; and
the third, the Duke de Longueville and the Prince de Conti, brother and
brother-in-law of Condé. They all alighted and hastened to pay their
respects to the king and queen in their coach. The queen fixed her eyes
upon the carriage they had left, and seeing that it was empty, she
said:

“But where is Madame de Longueville?”

“Ah, yes, where is my sister?” asked the prince.

“Madame de Longueville is ill,” said the duke, “and she desired me to
excuse her to your majesty.”

Anne gave a quick glance to Mazarin, who answered by an almost
imperceptible shake of his head.

“What do you say of this?” asked the queen.

“I say that she is a hostage for the Parisians,” answered the cardinal.

“Why is she not come?” asked the prince in a low voice, addressing his
brother.

“Silence,” whispered the duke, “she has her reasons.”

“She will ruin us!” returned the prince.

“She will save us,” said Conti.

Carriages now arrived in crowds; those of the Marechal de Villeroy,
Guitant, Villequier and Comminges came into the line. The two
musketeers arrived in their turn, holding the horses of D’Artagnan and
Porthos in their hands. These two instantly mounted, the coachman of
the latter replacing D’Artagnan on the coach-box of the royal coach.
Mousqueton took the place of the coachman, and drove standing, for
reasons known to himself, like Automedon of antiquity.

The queen, though occupied by a thousand details, tried to catch the
Gascon’s eye; but he, with his wonted prudence, had mingled with the
crowd.

“Let us be the avant guard,” said he to Porthos, “and find good
quarters at Saint Germain; nobody will think of us, and for my part I
am greatly fatigued.”

“As for me,” replied Porthos, “I am falling asleep, which is strange,
considering we have not had any fighting; truly the Parisians are
idiots.”

“Or rather, we are very clever,” said D’Artagnan.

“Perhaps.”

“And how is your wrist?”

“Better; but do you think that we’ve got them this time?”

“Got what?”

“You your command, and I my title?”

“I’faith! yes—I should expect so; besides, if they forget, I shall take
the liberty of reminding them.”

“The queen’s voice! she is speaking,” said Porthos; “I think she wants
to ride on horseback.”

“Oh, she would like it, but——”

“But what?”

“The cardinal won’t allow it. Gentlemen,” he said, addressing the two
musketeers, “accompany the royal carriage, we are going forward to look
for lodgings.”

D’Artagnan started off for Saint Germain, followed by Porthos.

“We will go on, gentlemen,” said the queen.

And the royal carriage drove on, followed by the other coaches and
about fifty horsemen.

They reached Saint German without any accident; on descending, the
queen found the prince awaiting her, bare-headed, to offer her his
hand.

“What an awakening for the Parisians!” said the queen, radiant.

“It is war,” said the prince.

“Well, then, let it be war! Have we not on our side the conqueror of
Rocroy, of Nordlingen, of Lens?”

The prince bowed low.

It was then three o’clock in the morning. The queen walked first, every
one followed her. About two hundred persons had accompanied her in her
flight.

“Gentlemen,” said the queen, laughing, “pray take up your abode in the
chateau; it is large, and there will be no want of room for you all;
but, as we never thought of coming here, I am informed that there are,
in all, only three beds in the whole establishment, one for the king,
one for me——”

“And one for the cardinal,” muttered the prince.

“Am I—am I, then, to sleep on the floor?” asked Gaston d’Orleans, with
a forced smile.

“No, my prince,” replied Mazarin, “the third bed is intended for your
highness.”

“But your eminence?” replied the prince.

“I,” answered Mazarin, “I shall not sleep at all; I have work to do.”

Gaston desired that he should be shown into the room wherein he was to
sleep, without in the least concerning himself as to where his wife and
daughter were to repose.

“Well, for my part, I shall go to bed,” said D’Artagnan; “come,
Porthos.”

Porthos followed the lieutenant with that profound confidence he ever
had in the wisdom of his friend. They walked from one end of the
chateau to the other, Porthos looking with wondering eyes at
D’Artagnan, who was counting on his fingers.

“Four hundred, at a pistole each, four hundred pistoles.”

“Yes,” interposed Porthos, “four hundred pistoles; but who is to make
four hundred pistoles?”

“A pistole is not enough,” said D’Artagnan, “’tis worth a louis.”

“What is worth a louis?”

“Four hundred, at a louis each, make four hundred louis.”

“Four hundred?” said Porthos.

“Yes, there are two hundred of them, and each of them will need two,
which will make four hundred.”

“But four hundred what?”

“Listen!” cried D’Artagnan.

But as there were all kinds of people about, who were in a state of
stupefaction at the unexpected arrival of the court, he whispered in
his friend’s ear.

“I understand,” answered Porthos, “I understand you perfectly, on my
honor; two hundred louis, each of us, would be making a pretty thing of
it; but what will people say?”

“Let them say what they will; besides, how will they know that we are
doing it?”

“But who will distribute these things?” asked Porthos.

“Isn’t Mousqueton there?”

“But he wears my livery; my livery will be known,” replied Porthos.

“He can turn his coat inside out.”

“You are always in the right, my dear friend,” cried Porthos; “but
where the devil do you discover all the notions you put into practice?”

D’Artagnan smiled. The two friends turned down the first street they
came to. Porthos knocked at the door of a house to the right, whilst
D’Artagnan knocked at the door of a house to the left.

“Some straw,” they said.

“Sir, we don’t keep any,” was the reply of the people who opened the
doors; “but please ask at the hay dealer’s.”

“Where is the hay dealer’s?”

“At the last large door in the street.”

“Are there any other people in Saint Germain who sell straw?”

“Yes; there’s the landlord of the Lamb, and Gros-Louis the farmer; they
both live in the Rue des Ursulines.”

“Very well.”

D’Artagnan went instantly to the hay dealer and bargained with him for
a hundred and fifty trusses of straw, which he obtained, at the rate of
three pistoles each. He went afterward to the innkeeper and bought from
him two hundred trusses at the same price. Finally, Farmer Louis sold
them eighty trusses, making in all four hundred and thirty.

There was no more to be had in Saint Germain. This foraging did not
occupy more than half an hour. Mousqueton, duly instructed, was put at
the head of this sudden and new business. He was cautioned not to let a
bit of straw out of his hands under a louis the truss, and they
intrusted to him straw to the amount of four hundred and thirty louis.
D’Artagnan, taking with him three trusses of straw, returned to the
chateau, where everybody, freezing with cold and more than half asleep,
envied the king, the queen, and the Duke of Orleans, on their camp
beds. The lieutenant’s entrance produced a burst of laughter in the
great drawing-room; but he did not appear to notice that he was the
object of general attention, but began to arrange, with so much
cleverness, nicety and gayety, his straw bed, that the mouths of all
these poor creatures, who could not go to sleep, began to water.

“Straw!” they all cried out, “straw! where is there any to be found?”

“I can show you,” answered the Gascon.

And he conducted them to Mousqueton, who freely distributed the trusses
at the rate of a louis apiece. It was thought rather dear, but people
wanted to sleep, and who would not give even two or three louis for a
few hours of sound sleep?

D’Artagnan gave up his bed to any one who wanted it, making it over
about a dozen times; and since he was supposed to have paid, like the
others, a louis for his truss of straw, he pocketed in that way thirty
louis in less than half an hour. At five o’clock in the morning the
straw was worth eighty francs a truss and there was no more to be had.

D’Artagnan had taken the precaution to set apart four trusses for his
own use. He put in his pocket the key of the room where he had hidden
them, and accompanied by Porthos returned to settle with Mousqueton,
who, naively, and like the worthy steward that he was, handed them four
hundred and thirty louis and kept one hundred for himself.

Mousqueton, who knew nothing of what was going on in the chateau,
wondered that the idea had not occurred to him sooner. D’Artagnan put
the gold in his hat, and in going back to the chateau settled the
reckoning with Porthos, each of them had cleared two hundred and
fifteen louis.

Porthos, however, found that he had no straw left for himself. He
returned to Mousqueton, but the steward had sold the last wisp. He then
repaired to D’Artagnan, who, thanks to his four trusses of straw, was
in the act of making up and tasting, by anticipation, the luxury of a
bed so soft, so well stuffed at the head, so well covered at the foot,
that it would have excited the envy of the king himself, if his majesty
had not been fast asleep in his own. D’Artagnan could on no account
consent to pull his bed to pieces again for Porthos, but for a
consideration of four louis that the latter paid him for it, he
consented that Porthos should share his couch with him. He laid his
sword at the head, his pistols by his side, stretched his cloak over
his feet, placed his felt hat on the top of his cloak and extended
himself luxuriously on the straw, which rustled under him. He was
already enjoying the sweet dream engendered by the possession of two
hundred and nineteen louis, made in a quarter of an hour, when a voice
was heard at the door of the hall, which made him stir.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan!” it cried.

“Here!” cried Porthos, “here!”

Porthos foresaw that if D’Artagnan was called away he should remain the
sole possessor of the bed. An officer approached.

“I am come to fetch you, Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“From whom?”

“His eminence sent me.”

“Tell my lord that I’m going to sleep, and I advise him, as a friend,
to do the same.”

“His eminence is not gone to bed and will not go to bed, and wants you
instantly.”

“The devil take Mazarin, who does not know when to sleep at the proper
time. What does he want with me? Is it to make me a captain? In that
case I will forgive him.”

And the musketeer rose, grumbling, took his sword, hat, pistols, and
cloak, and followed the officer, whilst Porthos, alone and sole
possessor of the bed, endeavored to follow the good example of falling
asleep, which his predecessor had set him.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said the cardinal, on perceiving him, “I have
not forgotten with what zeal you have served me. I am going to prove to
you that I have not.”

“Good,” thought the Gascon, “this is a promising beginning.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” he resumed, “do you wish to become a captain?”

“Yes, my lord.”

“And your friend still longs to be made a baron?”

“At this very moment, my lord, he no doubt dreams that he is one
already.”

“Then,” said Mazarin, taking from his portfolio the letter which he had
already shown D’Artagnan, “take this dispatch and carry it to England.”

D’Artagnan looked at the envelope; there was no address on it.

“Am I not to know to whom to present it?”

“You will know when you reach London; at London you may tear off the
outer envelope.”

“And what are my instructions?”

“To obey in every particular the man to whom this letter is addressed.
You must set out for Boulogne. At the Royal Arms of England you will
find a young gentleman named Mordaunt.”

“Yes, my lord; and what am I to do with this young gentleman?”

“Follow wherever he leads you.”

D’Artagnan looked at the cardinal with a stupefied air.

“There are your instructions,” said Mazarin; “go!”

“Go! ’tis easy to say so, but that requires money, and I haven’t any.”

“Ah!” replied Mazarin, “so you have no money?”

“None, my lord.”

“But the diamond I gave you yesterday?”

“I wish to keep it in remembrance of your eminence.”

Mazarin sighed.

“’Tis very dear living in England, my lord, especially as envoy
extraordinary.”

“Zounds!” replied Mazarin, “the people there are very sedate, and their
habits, since the revolution, simple; but no matter.”

He opened a drawer and took out a purse.

“What do you say to a thousand crowns?”

D’Artagnan pouted out his lower lip in a most extraordinary manner.

“I reply, my lord, ’tis but little, as certainly I shall not go alone.”

“I suppose not. Monsieur du Vallon, that worthy gentleman, for, with
the exception of yourself, Monsieur d’Artagnan, there’s not a man in
France that I esteem and love so much as him——”

“Then, my lord,” replied D’Artagnan, pointing to the purse which
Mazarin still held, “if you love and esteem him so much, you—understand
me?”

“Be it so! on his account I add two hundred crowns.”

“Scoundrel!” muttered D’Artagnan. “But on our return,” he said aloud,
“may we, that is, my friend and I, depend on having, he his barony, and
I my promotion?”

“On the honor of Mazarin.”

“I should like another sort of oath better,” said D’Artagnan to
himself; then aloud, “May I not offer my duty to her majesty the
queen?”

“Her majesty is asleep and you must set off directly,” replied Mazarin;
“go, pray, sir——”

“One word more, my lord; if there’s any fighting where I’m going, must
I fight?”

“You are to obey the commands of the personage to whom I have addressed
the inclosed letter.”

“’Tis well,” said D’Artagnan, holding out his hand to receive the
money. “I offer my best respects and services to you, my lord.”

D’Artagnan then, returning to the officer, said:

“Sir, have the kindness also to awaken Monsieur du Vallon and to say
’tis by his eminence’s order, and that I shall await him at the
stables.”

The officer went off with an eagerness that showed the Gascon that he
had some personal interest in the matter.

Porthos was snoring most musically when some one touched him on the
shoulder.

“I come from the cardinal,” said the officer.

“Heigho!” said Porthos, opening his large eyes; “what have you got to
say?”

“That his eminence has ordered you to England and that Monsieur
d’Artagnan is waiting for you in the stables.”

Porthos sighed heavily, arose, took his hat, his pistols, and his
cloak, and departed, casting a look of regret upon the couch where he
had hoped to sleep so well.

No sooner had he turned his back than the officer laid himself down in
it, and he had scarcely crossed the threshold before his successor, in
his turn, was snoring immoderately. It was very natural, he being the
only person in the whole assemblage, except the king, the queen, and
the Duke of Orleans, who slept gratuitously.




Chapter LIV.
In which we hear Tidings of Aramis.


D’Artagnan went straight to the stables; day was just dawning. He found
his horse and that of Porthos fastened to the manger, but to an empty
manger. He took pity on these poor animals and went to a corner of the
stable, where he saw a little straw, but in doing so he struck his foot
against a human body, which uttered a cry and arose on its knees,
rubbing its eyes. It was Mousqueton, who, having no straw to lie upon,
had helped himself to that of the horses.

“Mousqueton,” cried D’Artagnan, “let us be off! Let us set off.”

Mousqueton, recognizing the voice of his master’s friend, got up
suddenly, and in doing so let fall some louis which he had appropriated
to himself illegally during the night.

“Ho! ho!” exclaimed D’Artagnan, picking up a louis and displaying it;
“here’s a louis that smells confoundedly of straw.”

Mousqueton blushed so confusedly that the Gascon began to laugh at him
and said:

“Porthos would be angry, my dear Monsieur Mousqueton, but I pardon you,
only let us remember that this gold must serve us as a joke, so be
gay—come along.”

Mousqueton instantly assumed a jovial countenance, saddled the horses
quickly and mounted his own without making faces over it.

Whilst this went on, Porthos arrived with a very cross look on his
face, and was astonished to find the lieutenant resigned and Mousqueton
almost merry.

“Ah, that’s it!” he cried, “you have your promotion and I my barony.”

“We are going to fetch our brevets,” said D’Artagnan, “and when we come
back, Master Mazarin will sign them.”

“And where are we going?” asked Porthos.

“To Paris first; I have affairs to settle.”

And they both set out for Paris.

On arriving at its gates they were astounded to see the threatening
aspect of the capital. Around a broken-down carriage the people were
uttering imprecations, whilst the persons who had attempted to escape
were made prisoners—that is to say, an old man and two women. On the
other hand, as the two friends approached to enter, they showed them
every kind of civility, thinking them deserters from the royal party
and wishing to bind them to their own.

“What is the king doing?” they asked.

“He is asleep.”

“And the Spanish woman?”

“Dreaming.”

“And the cursed Italian?”

“He is awake, so keep on the watch, as they are gone away; it’s for
some purpose, rely on it. But as you are the strongest, after all,”
continued D’Artagnan, “don’t be furious with old men and women, and
keep your wrath for more appropriate occasions.”

The people listened to these words and let go the ladies, who thanked
D’Artagnan with an eloquent look.

“Now! onward!” cried the Gascon.

And they continued their way, crossing the barricades, getting the
chains about their legs, pushed about, questioning and questioned.

In the place of the Palais Royal D’Artagnan saw a sergeant, who was
drilling six or seven hundred citizens. It was Planchet, who brought
into play profitably the recollections of the regiment of Piedmont.

In passing before D’Artagnan he recognized his former master.

“Good-day, Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said Planchet proudly.

“Good-day, Monsieur Dulaurier,” replied D’Artagnan.

Planchet stopped short, staring at D’Artagnan. The first row, seeing
their sergeant stop, stopped in their turn, and so on to the very last.

“These citizens are dreadfully ridiculous,” observed D’Artagnan to
Porthos and went on his way.

Five minutes afterward he entered the hotel of La Chevrette, where
pretty Madeleine, the hostess, came to him.

“My dear Mistress Turquaine,” said the Gascon, “if you happen to have
any money, lock it up quickly; if you happen to have any jewels, hide
them directly; if you happen to have any debtors, make them pay you, or
any creditors, don’t pay them.”

“Why, prithee?” asked Madeleine.

“Because Paris is going to be reduced to dust and ashes like Babylon,
of which you have no doubt heard tell.”

“And are you going to leave me at such a time?”

“This very instant.”

“And where are you going?”

“Ah, if you could tell me that, you would be doing me a service.”

“Ah, me! ah, me!

“Have you any letters for me?” inquired D’Artagnan, wishing to signify
to the hostess that her lamentations were superfluous and that
therefore she had better spare him demonstrations of her grief.

“There’s one just arrived,” and she handed the letter to D’Artagnan.

“From Athos!” cried D’Artagnan, recognizing the handwriting.

“Ah!” said Porthos, “let us hear what he says.”

D’Artagnan opened the letter and read as follows:

“Dear D’Artagnan, dear Du Vallon, my good friends, perhaps this may be
the last time that you will ever hear from me. Aramis and I are very
unhappy; but God, our courage, and the remembrance of our friendship
sustain us. Think often of Raoul. I intrust to you certain papers which
are at Blois; and in two months and a half, if you do not hear of us,
take possession of them.

“Embrace, with all your heart, the vicomte, for your devoted, friend,

 “ATHOS.”


“I believe, by Heaven,” said D’Artagnan, “that I shall embrace him,
since he’s upon our road; and if he is so unfortunate as to lose our
dear Athos, from that very day he becomes my son.”

“And I,” said Porthos, “shall make him my sole heir.”

“Let us see, what more does Athos say?”

“Should you meet on your journey a certain Monsieur Mordaunt, distrust
him, in a letter I cannot say more.”

“Monsieur Mordaunt!” exclaimed the Gascon, surprised.

“Monsieur Mordaunt! ’tis well,” said Porthos, “we shall remember that;
but see, there is a postscript from Aramis.”

“So there is,” said D’Artagnan, and he read:

“We conceal the place where we are, dear friends, knowing your
brotherly affection and that you would come and die with us were we to
reveal it.”

“Confound it,” interrupted Porthos, with an explosion of passion which
sent Mousqueton to the other end of the room; “are they in danger of
dying?”

D’Artagnan continued:

“Athos bequeaths to you Raoul, and I bequeath to you my revenge. If by
any good luck you lay your hand on a certain man named Mordaunt, tell
Porthos to take him into a corner and to wring his neck. I dare not say
more in a letter.

 “ARAMIS.”


“If that is all, it is easily done,” said Porthos.

“On the contrary,” observed D’Artagnan, with a vexed look; “it would be
impossible.”

“How so?”

“It is precisely this Monsieur Mordaunt whom we are going to join at
Boulogne and with whom we cross to England.”

“Well, suppose instead of joining this Monsieur Mordaunt we were to go
and join our friends?” said Porthos, with a gesture fierce enough to
have frightened an army.

“I did think of it, but this letter has neither date nor postmark.”

“True,” said Porthos. And he began to wander about the room like a man
beside himself, gesticulating and half drawing his sword out of the
scabbard.

As to D’Artagnan, he remained standing like a man in consternation,
with the deepest affliction depicted on his face.

“Ah, this is not right; Athos insults us; he wishes to die alone; it is
bad, bad, bad.”

Mousqueton, witnessing this despair, melted into tears in a corner of
the room.

“Come,” said D’Artagnan, “all this leads to nothing. Let us go on. We
will embrace Raoul, and perhaps he will have news of Athos.”

“Stop—an idea!” cried Porthos; “indeed, my dear D’Artagnan, I don’t
know how you manage, but you are always full of ideas; let us go and
embrace Raoul.”

“Woe to that man who should happen to contradict my master at this
moment,” said Mousqueton to himself; “I wouldn’t give a farthing for
his life.”

They set out. On arriving at the Rue Saint Denis, the friends found a
vast concourse of people. It was the Duc de Beaufort, who was coming
from the Vendomois and whom the coadjutor was showing to the Parisians,
intoxicated with joy. With the duke’s aid they already considered
themselves invincible.

The two friends turned off into a side street to avoid meeting the
prince, and so reached the Saint Denis gate.

“Is it true,” said the guard to the two cavaliers, “that the Duc de
Beaufort has arrived in Paris?”

“Nothing more certain; and the best proof of it is,” said D’Artagnan,
“that he has dispatched us to meet the Duc de Vendome, his father, who
is coming in his turn.”

“Long live De Beaufort!” cried the guards, and they drew back
respectfully to let the two friends pass. Once across the barriers
these two knew neither fatigue nor fear. Their horses flew, and they
never ceased speaking of Athos and Aramis.

The camp had entered Saint Omer; the friends made a little detour and
went to the camp, and gave the army an exact account of the flight of
the king and queen. They found Raoul near his tent, reclining on a
truss of hay, of which his horse stole some mouthfuls; the young man’s
eyes were red and he seemed dejected. The Marechal de Grammont and the
Comte de Guiche had returned to Paris and he was quite lonely. And as
soon as he saw the two cavaliers he ran to them with open arms.

“Oh, is it you, dear friends? Did you come here to fetch me? Will you
take me away with you? Do you bring me tidings of my guardian?”

“Have you not received any?” said D’Artagnan to the youth.

“Alas! sir, no, and I do not know what has become of him; so that I am
really so unhappy that I weep.”

In fact, tears rolled down his cheeks.

Porthos turned aside, in order not to show by his honest round face
what was passing in his mind.

“Deuce take it!” cried D’Artagnan, more moved than he had been for a
long time, “don’t despair, my friend, if you have not received any
letters from the count, we have received one.”

“Oh, really!” cried Raoul.

“And a comforting one, too,” added D’Artagnan, seeing the delight that
his intelligence gave the young man.

“Have you it?” asked Raoul

“Yes—that is, I had it,” repined the Gascon, making believe to find it.
“Wait, it ought to be there in my pocket; it speaks of his return, does
it not, Porthos?”

All Gascon as he was, D’Artagnan could not bear alone the weight of
that falsehood.

“Yes,” replied Porthos, coughing.

“Eh, give it to me!” said the young man.

“Eh! I read it a little while since. Can I have lost it? Ah! confound
it! yes, my pocket has a hole in it.”

“Oh, yes, Monsieur Raoul!” said Mousqueton, “the letter was very
consoling. These gentlemen read it to me and I wept for joy.”

“But at any rate, you know where he is, Monsieur d’Artagnan?” asked
Raoul, somewhat comforted.

“Ah! that’s the thing!” replied the Gascon. “Undoubtedly I know it, but
it is a mystery.”

“Not to me, I hope?”

“No, not to you, so I am going to tell you where he is.”

Porthos devoured D’Artagnan with wondering eyes.

“Where the devil shall I say that he is, so that he cannot try to
rejoin him?” thought D’Artagnan.

“Well, where is he, sir?” asked Raoul, in a soft and coaxing voice.

“He is at Constantinople.”

“Among the Turks!” exclaimed Raoul, alarmed. “Good heavens! how can you
tell me that?”

“Does that alarm you?” cried D’Artagnan. “Pooh! what are the Turks to
such men as the Comte de la Fere and the Abbé d’Herblay?”

“Ah, his friend is with him?” said Raoul. “That comforts me a little.”

“Has he wit or not—this demon D’Artagnan?” said Porthos, astonished at
his friend’s deception.

“Now, sir,” said D’Artagnan, wishing to change the conversation, “here
are fifty pistoles that the count has sent you by the same courier. I
suppose you have no more money and that they will be welcome.”

“I have still twenty pistoles, sir.”

“Well, take them; that makes seventy.”

“And if you wish for more,” said Porthos, putting his hand to his
pocket——

“Thank you, sir,” replied Raoul, blushing; “thank you a thousand
times.”

At this moment Olivain appeared. “Apropos,” said D’Artagnan, loud
enough for the servant to hear him, “are you satisfied with Olivain?”

“Yes, in some respects, tolerably well.”

Olivain pretended to have heard nothing and entered the tent.

“What fault do you find with the fellow?”

“He is a glutton.”

“Oh, sir!” cried Olivain, reappearing at this accusation.

“And a little bit of a thief.”

“Oh, sir! oh!”

“And, more especially, a notorious coward.”

“Oh, oh! sir! you really vilify me!” cried Olivain.

“The deuce!” cried D’Artagnan. “Pray learn, Monsieur Olivain, that
people like us are not to be served by cowards. Rob your master, eat
his sweetmeats, and drink his wine; but, by Jove! don’t be a coward, or
I shall cut off your ears. Look at Monsieur Mouston, see the honorable
wounds he has received, observe how his habitual valor has given
dignity to his countenance.”

Mousqueton was in the third heaven and would have embraced D’Artagnan
had he dared; meanwhile he resolved to sacrifice his life for him on
the next occasion that presented itself.

“Send away that fellow, Raoul,” said the Gascon; “for if he’s a coward
he will disgrace thee some day.”

“Monsieur says I am coward,” cried Olivain, “because he wanted the
other day to fight a cornet in Grammont’s regiment and I refused to
accompany him.”

“Monsieur Olivain, a lackey ought never to disobey,” said D’Artagnan,
sternly; then taking him aside, he whispered to him: “Thou hast done
right; thy master was in the wrong; here’s a crown for thee, but should
he ever be insulted and thou dost not let thyself be cut in quarters
for him, I will cut out thy tongue. Remember that.”

Olivain bowed and slipped the crown into his pocket.

“And now, Raoul,” said the Gascon, “Monsieur du Vallon and I are going
away as ambassadors, where, I know not; but should you want anything,
write to Madame Turquaine, at La Chevrette, Rue Tiquetonne and draw
upon her purse as on a banker—with economy; for it is not so well
filled as that of Monsieur d’Emery.”

And having, meantime, embraced his ward, he passed him into the robust
arms of Porthos, who lifted him up from the ground and held him a
moment suspended near the noble heart of the formidable giant.

“Come,” said D’Artagnan, “let us go.”

And they set out for Boulogne, where toward evening they arrived, their
horses flecked with foam and dark with perspiration.

At ten steps from the place where they halted was a young man in black,
who seemed waiting for some one, and who, from the moment he saw them
enter the town, never took his eyes off them.

D’Artagnan approached him, and seeing him stare so fixedly, said:

“Well, friend! I don’t like people to quiz me!”

“Sir,” said the young man, “do you not come from Paris, if you please?”

D’Artagnan thought it was some gossip who wanted news from the capital.

“Yes, sir,” he said, in a softened tone.

“Are you not going to put up at the ‘Arms of England’?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Are you not charged with a mission from his eminence, Cardinal
Mazarin?”

“Yes, sir.”

“In that case, I am the man you have to do with. I am M. Mordaunt.”

“Ah!” thought D’Artagnan, “the man I am warned against by Athos.”

“Ah!” thought Porthos, “the man Aramis wants me to strangle.”

They both looked searchingly at the young man, who misunderstood the
meaning of that inquisition.

“Do you doubt my word?” he said. “In that case I can give you proofs.”

“No, sir,” said D’Artagnan; “and we place ourselves at your orders.”

“Well, gentlemen,” resumed Mordaunt, “we must set out without delay,
to-day is the last day granted me by the cardinal. My ship is ready,
and had you not come I must have set off without you, for General
Cromwell expects my return impatiently.”

“So!” thought the lieutenant, “’tis to General Cromwell that our
dispatches are addressed.”

“Have you no letter for him?” asked the young man.

“I have one, the seal of which I am not to break till I reach London;
but since you tell me to whom it is addressed, ’tis useless to wait
till then.”

D’Artagnan tore open the envelope of the letter. It was directed to
“Monsieur Oliver Cromwell, General of the Army of the English Nation.”

“Ah!” said D’Artagnan; “a singular commission.”

“Who is this Monsieur Oliver Cromwell?” inquired Porthos.

“Formerly a brewer,” replied the Gascon.

“Perhaps Mazarin wishes to make a speculation in beer, as we did in
straw,” said Porthos.

“Come, come, gentlemen,” said Mordaunt, impatiently, “let us depart.”

“What!” exclaimed Porthos “without supper? Cannot Monsieur Cromwell
wait a little?”

“Yes, but I?” said Mordaunt.

“Well, you,” said Porthos, “what then?”

“I cannot wait.”

“Oh! as to you, that is not my concern, and I shall sup either with or
without your permission.”

The young man’s eyes kindled in secret, but he restrained himself.

“Monsieur,” said D’Artagnan, “you must excuse famished travelers.
Besides, our supper can’t delay you much. We will hasten on to the inn;
you will meanwhile proceed on foot to the harbor. We will take a bite
and shall be there as soon as you are.”

“Just as you please, gentlemen, provided we set sail,” he said.

“The name of your ship?” inquired D’Artagnan.

“The Standard.”

“Very well; in half an hour we shall be on board.”

And the friends, spurring on their horses, rode to the hotel, the “Arms
of England.”

“What do you say of that young man?” asked D’Artagnan, as they hurried
along.

“I say that he doesn’t suit me at all,” said Porthos, “and that I feel
a strong itching to follow Aramis’s advice.”

“By no means, my dear Porthos; that man is a messenger of General
Cromwell; it would insure for us a poor reception, I imagine, should it
be announced to him that we had twisted the neck of his confidant.”

“Nevertheless,” said Porthos, “I have always noticed that Aramis gives
good advice.”

“Listen,” returned D’Artagnan, “when our embassy is finished——”

“Well?”

“If it brings us back to France——”

“Well?”

“Well, we shall see.”

At that moment the two friends reached the hotel, “Arms of England,”
where they supped with hearty appetite and then at once proceeded to
the port.

There they found a brig ready to set sail, upon the deck of which they
recognized Mordaunt walking up and down impatiently.

“It is singular,” said D’Artagnan, whilst the boat was taking them to
the Standard, “it is astonishing how that young man resembles some one
I must have known, but who it was I cannot yet remember.”

A few minutes later they were on board, but the embarkation of the
horses was a longer matter than that of the men, and it was eight
o’clock before they raised anchor.

The young man stamped impatiently and ordered all sail to be spread.

Porthos, completely used up by three nights without sleep and a journey
of seventy leagues on horseback, retired to his cabin and went to
sleep.

D’Artagnan, overcoming his repugnance to Mordaunt, walked with him upon
the deck and invented a hundred stories to make him talk.

Mousqueton was seasick.
